HE BUILT WELL

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
AND GENEALOGY OF
THE DESCENDANTS OF

JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER
OF FAIR HAVEN TOWNSHIP
CARROLL COUNTY, ILLINOIS

COMPILED BY

JAMES R. GLACKING, C. G.
Ya Ka? Tet. s Coty Ad aoe Ob APA WES J TES

GERa 6941 F26 q ONE EA ee eo we Ce PO

( 0 Ria rWlAaC| 2 (91s PLACE hae werkt CS

Gee /7_ue Ss 7 DUx BX, an LOBCTOL ,

HE BUILT WELL
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
AND GENEALOGY OF
THE DESCENDANTS OF
JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER

OF FAIR HAVEN TOWNSHIP
CARROLL COUNTY, ILLINOIS

COMPILED BY

JAMES R. GLACKING, C. G.

Now 28 Qi, 1991

te CHars ofa.

TH Ss Sevier Coe /S - Pas roey oF ae ae Jolt aplil

DACIHL ER SAM, fy wife Sear7rlem 485 ZoAlETk §
(ht Me Pr tees reser (EL0W/otS “ht IESE,

Ww, CABAL 14 OTHER, (uilfo L d»ontr Kenyenz7h EL AS she

Direr B foe 7H#S diree CiwAs Soe) WAS A CLO -

Dew O47 ER, OF THE MARR ATE WRITE, To Ande Saco’
OA EH Lee) hea CABML) YGOTHER. ELISA Le) CA4EVG EWA Opera
YQLIEO Ne “ATAEAS Paripse , CEOS SELO4ACHES,
“IRfO Z tenn dew WELL As “tg ? Lu rile CLAD -

FRCL fr. VACE OB Mil TIUL5 O22 tFA7 4 Ly, Yoo Hk,
What JO FOU Soke ORTES, SOR Gav (FAV 7 &

Aavtiea,  CAD

er rn en

en

ee ee ee ee cee

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DEDICATION 1-2
PREFACE OF ALBERT H. DAEHLER 3-4

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF- JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER

PREFACE 5

CHILDHOOD 6-14
ADOLESCENCE 15-25
FAMILY MAN 26-53
EMIGRATION 54-55
EXPERIENCES IN AMERICA 56-69
NOTES ON THE DAEHLER ANCESTRY 70-71

GENEALOGY OF THE DESCENDANTS OF JOHANN KONRAD
AND KATHARINA DAEHLER

(See the separate table of contents at the
beginning of this section. ) 72-120

SOURCES OF GENEALOGICAL INFORMATION 121-122
—J __j

J

—} __)
DEDICATION

All of us at one time or another need or
desire information about our families, past and present.
This information is rarely readily available because it
is not an easy task to record it in a simple and
concise form.

Realizing the lack of and also the need for
records of this type, Louis A. Daehler and I originated
the idea of compiling a genealogical work dealing with
the Daehler family. The plan called upon him to handle
the translation of the autobiography of his great-grand-
father and upon me to compile the genealogy of that
gentleman's descendants.

Much effort has been expended in the formation
of this book. The great variety of tasks involved, how-
ever, has made the labor of compilation enjoyable as well
as informative. Numerous relatives and friends have com-
pleted questionnaires. Cemeteries have been visited, and
tombstone inscriptions have been copied. Newspaper files
have been searched. Court and church records, public and
private library resources, and the pages of family records
have been the objects of close scrutiny and study. A
voluminous correspondence with relatives, genealogists,
clergymen, public officials, local historians, and trans-
lators of the German language has been carried on.

It is impossible to cite on a page or two every
instance of time, effort, and energy that has been spent
in research, in investigation, in gathering information,
in checking items for accuracy, in selecting the portions
for inclusion in the final work, in assembling and orga-
nizing the material in an arrangement deemed most suit-
able, in writing, in proof reading, and in the correction
of errors in the written results before submitting the
final product for publication.

It took patience and perseverance to complete
this task. Louis's pride and interest in his heritage
remained an inspirational drive for both of us. It is
a matter of deep regret that he did not live to see our
venture completed. He passed away in his Porterville,
California, home on May 21, 1975. It has remained for
me to assemble the work in final form and to present it
for publication.

I know that he would want me to reiterate our
gratitude to three volunteer collectors who so ably
assisted us: his sister, Mrs. Fay H. Reitzel of Sterling,
Ill.; and his cousins, Mrs. John G. Doden of Chadwick,
Ill., and Mrs. Roy E. Schiefelbein of Wichita, Kansas.
There are so many others who did so much that it is im-
possible to mention each and every one by name. To each
of you go our sincere thanks. Without your assistance
this book would not have been possible.

In dedicating this book to the memory of
LOUIS ALBERT DAEHLER, I truly hope that these studies
may be a source of pride and personal treasure to you.
May you, in the spirit of the recent research and pub-
lications regarding the history of Carroll County,
Illinois, say with the psalmist:

"My lines have fallen in pleasant places;

Yea, I have a goodly heritage." (Psalms, 16:6)
616 Sheridan Road 2, tee -
Highwood, Illinois f BOL <n . hia Mba

JULY Ls L875 7/7 James R. Glacking, C. G.

7
PREFACE

On a warm, sunny day in June, 1897, we walked,
we Daehlers, along a woodland path that wound among the
trees, over a little plank bridge, and up to a clearing
at the top of a hill. Here a company of friends, many
of them from far away, were gathered to pay last honor
to him whose body we were that day committing to the
earth. On our way we had passed the vineyard that he
had planted and tended, and the little rustic seats that
he had made under the trees.

The minister said the solemn words of the bur-
ial service; and as the casket descended, the assembled
company sang one more good last hymn: EIN FESTE BURG IST
UNSER GOTT. As the rich German voices echoed against the
wall of forest trees about the clearing, the noble words
and the incomparable music of the hymn seemed to give
assurance that all was well. For like his ancestors be-
fore him, Johann Konrad Daehler was a builder; and his
building was good.

Often my mother had spoken of a manuscript that
Grandfather was supposed to have left, an auobiography.
Often we had wondered what might have become of it. It
was not until some time in 1925, twenty-eight years after
his death, that his granddaughter, my cousin, Dorothea
Smith, found it in a box among some miscellaneous things
in a barn. Dora sent the manuscript, consisting of two
red covered notebooks, to me in Colorado Springs. I at
once put it into typescript, and sent copies back to
Illinois, where they were circulated among those who were
interested.

Now that another generation of descendants is
growing up, most of whom do not read German readily, it
seems desirable that an English translation should be
prepared. For this reason I have undertaken the task.

But there is another motive: it has been fascinating work.
Part of my interest naturally is grounded in a sentiment
of love and respect for the memory of my grandfather. In
addition there is the interest in what now may be regarded
as a first hand historical document. The many technical
problems that have arisen in the work of translation have
been a constant and inspiring challenge to my quite
inadequate knowledge and skill.

Obviously the translation has many faults. The
best I can claim for it is that I have tried to be faith-
ful to the letter and to the spirit of the original. I
have taken few liberties with the text. Obvious mis-
spellings I have corrected, always noting the original.
Grandfather's manuscript is convincing testimony of the
older systems of pedagogy. He was often beaten, he says,
for poor handwriting, but never for orthography; and he
misspells orthography! His handscript at age seventy-
two was like copper plate, and is clear and legible
after fifty years. The punctuation of course had to be
brought into conformity with English syntax. I have
sought to render the simplicity and honesty of the
original text. What interest there is in the text is
owing to the character and intelligence of the author;
the weaknesses I fear must be attributed to the trans-
lator.

Colorado, Springs, Colo.
Dec. 1, 1939 Albert H. Daehler

NOTE:

The autobiography and translation have remained
in manuscript form all these years. Albert H. Daehler
did present a copy of the English translation to the
library of the National Carl Schurz Association in
Philadelphia. In 1944 that organization published two
extracts from it in their bi-monthly periodical, THE
AMERICAN GERMAN REVIEW. The August, 1944, selection
(Vol. X, pp. 28-9) deals with the trip to and the
arrival in the United States. The October, 1944,
selection (Vol. XI, pp. 26-9) describes the difficulties
that faced the pioneers in settling in Fair Haven Town-
ship, Carroll County, Illinois. Both articles appeared
under the title: THE KIND OF STUFF THAT MADE AMERICA
WHAT IT IS TODAY.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER
TRANSLATED BY LOUIS A. DAEHLER, 1974

PREFACE

The world, or I would like to say, the entire
human race, has a history of which different incidents
and events of various periods of time have been gathered
together by intelligent men. These are of certain value
to posterity if they are written down in their true mean-
ing and without prejudice. So also a nation; aver vy; oa
village, yes even the individual human being, has a
history that could be of importance to his posterity,
even if it be only to satisfy curiosity.

I have been in contact with the world for almost
seventy-one years, yes even to know the customs of two
continents. This has caused me to write my so-called
autobiography. This means only my personal experiences
as far as I am able to remember them, for the curiosity
of my children and grandchildren.

Fair Haven, Illinois
January 4, 1882 Johann Konrad Daehler
CHILDHOOD

In the village of Freienseen, near Laubach, in
the Grand Duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt, Germany, I was born
the sixty of February, 1811, as an illegitimate child.
My mother was the daughter of the master tailor Heinrich
Benzel and his wife, Margretha. My father was the son
of the master carpenter Jacob Daehler; he was named
Johann Kurt Daehler.

My father was by summer a carpenter, and in the
winter time a wood cutter in the count's forest. Here
many hundred cords of word were made into charcoal for
the smelter works at Friedrichschutte, near Laubach.
This wood had to be restacked during the summer so that
it would be usable for the coaler to put on the wood
pile. There was extra income for the workers who, in
those days of Napoleon and his wars, were unable to find
work at their trade. Thus it was for my father. He re-
ceived twelve kreuzer for each cord of wood restacked.
From this income he would give his parents, with whom he
lived, three gulden; and the rest he spent on his little
son and his son's mother.

I did not find out that I was born illegitimate
until I was seven or eight years old, and could read and
write. By accident I found papers in a box of my father's.
Among them was a receipt from the treasurer of the parish
about the payment of bhres gulden fine for this offense
against the church.

Apparently, according to his notations, Father paid
for his military situation. Whether or not his name was to
be taken off the list of recruits was to be decided by two
delegates of the county government; they determined whether
or not he could be exempt. At that time every young man,
up to his twenty-sixth year of age, had to appear once a
year on a certain date at his county seat for re-enlistment.
Only those not needed at home had to become soldiers; and
those who were needed could return home, but had to appear
again next year.

Judging my father's character, he must have arranged
his marriage with facility because I do not remember my
parents' marriage ceremony or wedding; and I do have mem-
ories that go back further than my second year. From then
on I know only that we lived together: Father, Mother, and
I, with grandfather Benzel. My grandmother Benzel had died
when I was two years old; that I remember very well.

I grew up a very high spirited and happy boy. After
I passed my fourth and started my fifth year, this wantoness
was Slowed down by the school and by the spinning wheel with
which cottom was spun. I had to try to earn my bread by spin-
ning cottom; this was fun at the beginning. As soon as I
developed some ability, Mother increased the quantity of
yarn to be delivered. Because of this compulsion, spinning
sometimes became a nuisance, especially when I heard other
children sled riding or playing at other things. Often
different means of encouragement to spin were sought. For
instance, I could take my wheel into a neighbor's house
and spin in the company of several boys and girls; even
though sometimes, as it is with children, spinning would
be forgotten for a game. Then I could not accomplish my
task in time, so I would either feel the switch or was not
allowed to go ‘to bed before accomplishing my work. Also
my lessons for school had to be learned. Had I been busy
during the day, in the evening I was allowed to visit my
friends and have fun.

On the other hand, my father was more strict con-
cerning my lessons for school than my mother was about my
spinning. He was proud that his son was, in general, an
outstanding, eager pupil. He probably took a lesson from
his own school life, for he did not attend school regularly.
Therefore he could neither read nor figure well; only the
reading of printed writing went fairly well for him.

During the summer the variety of my occupations
was more than I liked. The spinning could not be stopped
since it helped to supply domestic needs. Since at meal
time the food had to be cooked, one needed firewood. Several
days of the week were set aside to gather wood in the count's
forest and carry it home; this I also liked to do in company.
Very often Mother went with us, as this was not looked upon
as theft. When one was caught by the forester, one sometimes
would be reprimanded and other times not. The degree of
punishment for my small load of wood was: for the value of
the wood, 3 kreuzer; for getting caught, to the forest
warden went 10 kreuzer; making a punishment of 13 kreuzer.
‘There is no doubt that I was caught about once a year. If
we boys climbed up in the trees and knocked down the dry
wood, we would be punished more severely. If one were
caught and held by the forester, he would be treated to an
additional whipping as a warning. I learned the saying
"far away is good for the shot."" I did not wait for him
even though sometime I had to leave my wood behind.

Furthermore Father had bought a goat so that we
would have the necessary milk. Butter we did not need. For
this goat I had to supply the necessary summer feed. Every
day in the evening I would gather in a basket as heavy as I
was able to carry greens and branches from hedges and those
places where no property owner would suffer damage.

All this happened after school hours. The division
of the day was as follows: in the morning from seven to
ten o'clock - school; from ten to five o'clock in the
afternoon - get wood. two or three times; from five to
seven o'clock - get feed and feed the goat; then one
hour of rest; and finally, before going to bed, memori-
zing for school such things as Bible verses and the
small catechism by Luther. A task of writing and figur-
ing had to be taken care of in the morning before school.
Writing and figuring were much fun, but I did not have
enough help at home to learn easily. When the teacher
reviewed my writing books, I often received punishment
for not writing neatly. Punishment would consist of a
whipping, or one had to hold out his hands. The teacher
would then hit with the suitable ruler three or four times
in the flat of the hand, changing from right to left.

I never received a whipping because of poor spell-
ing; spelling I found fairly easy. For figuring, however,
I had a special talent; and this was increased by my father
in a special way. He could not read or figure well, but he
had found out that a neighbor owned an arithmetic book by
which one could learn figuring through self study. The
author was Z. P. Lechner. This book Father obtained through
purchase. When he came home from work in the evening, he
usually would busy himself until midnight studying this
book; and he succeeded well enough to become my teacher.

The school teacher was no Pythagoras and no magi-
cian in arithmetic. He found himself checkmated against me
in this respect. When I once asked him for an explanation
of an arithmetic problem, he said to me that he could not
figure that out himself. The text out of which he trans-
ferred problems to the student's papers showed only the
problem and the answer; the main thing, the method itself,
was not there. His entire arithmetic method was to the
rule of three and referred itself to business interest and
bills of exchange. I would have liked to have known more
about all arithmetic methods, but my father's Lechner did
the same thing.

When I was six and one-half years old in the year
1817, our family was enlarged by a pair of twins: my
brother, Johannes; and my sister, Katharina. The first of
these died of dysentery when he was nine months old.

Now came the time when my mother's brother, who
was my godfather, wanted to marry. This involved an apart-
ment for the couple. My grandfather, Heinrich Benzel, to
help this matter along, fixed a price for his dwelling,
which included a stable and a small garden. He turned this
over to his two children, who had to draw lots. The lots
brought the son the home for my grandfather's price.
Now our family was without a home, but my father
soon found a splendid opportunity for a new home. [In the
center of the village the widow of Martin Immelt, a shoe-
maker, with two grown children, had a home. One half of
it was dwelling house and the other half a barn. She was
so much in debt and without money to pay interest that the
home was sold by forced auction. As no buyer was found,
the mortgage holder, Johannes Jung, a baker, took it as
his property. Some time later it was offered to my father
to buy by the new owner. He took it as a dwelling for his
family. Father could only pay part of the price as a down
payment; the rest remained as capital held by the creditor.
We then annually, on St. Martin's day, paid the interest
of five per cent. The new home, before we could move in,
had to undergo repairs, which, under the circumstances, put
my father to great expense.

Under these circumstances so many February sixths
went by that I soon had my twelfth birthday, at which time
I received praise for being an eager pupil. The boy had
not lost much of his high spirits in spite of the fact that
he had sat like he were tied to the spinning wheel and was
then allowed to have fun with the other youths at the usual
playgounds. Here I felt like the devil had broken the chains.

Here I will go back a little and tell a suitable
story. My twin brother and sister were about two months old,
lying in their cradle in the evening sleeping. My mother
was outside at the well or busy somewhere else. I, who had
to rock the cradle, became extraordinarily impatient and
rocked so hard back and forth, or up and down, that the
cradle turned over and its appurtenances were on top of them.
Now the worry about the little twins, and even more about the
whipping which followed such an act regularly, caused me to
cry. This reached my mother's ears, and she came running in.
As she worked the little ones out, it was discovered that
they had been protected by the feather bed that served as a
cover and there was not the slightest injury to the twins.
Mother threatened that when Father came home from work on
Saturday, I would be punished. This was for me a very sor-
rowful week, but Father was very kind and happy when he came
home and found his family well. How could he punish me then?
In spite of this, I was used to, after receiving a whipping
at school and he had learned of it, receiving another one
when I arrived home.

My punishment did not relate to neglecting my
lessons, but rather to not being quiet or to some boyish
tricks. Since our school had a heavy enrollment, sometimes
as many as 180 pupils, our teacher had a lot of work. My
humble self was employed by the latter as a helper. This
was an advantage to me because it impelled a more serious mood.

My father made, during winter evening, those little
machines with which to spin cotton, for others to buy. I had
learned enough to be of help to him, and could make ready,
10

without his supervision, the small spindles necessary for
those machines. Those wore out easily and often broke
while spinning. I soon found this a steady occupation that
freed me from the distasteful spinning. During the summer ,
when not as much spinning was done as during the winter, I
was not fully occupied. However, so as not to be chained
to the spinning wheel and to fill in the space between
school hours and the gathering of firewood, I soon found
another opportunity. I had made a spray gun that the bee
keepers used to spray water on swarming bees. This instru-
ment was liked by the boys in the village; therefore, many
orders for them were made. I built one fifteen to sixteen
inches long; this earned for me from six to eight kreuzer.

Each time, while drilling a three quarter inch hole,

I broke out in a sweat. I sometimes drilled crooked or side-
ways; then new material had to be sought and the work started
over. This did not discourage me. I soon found another piece

of wood as an ordinary beech tree branch was suitable for this.
Work went on through one summer. Then there were fights among
the boys, splashing one another with water. Parents did not
look at this fun as being good any longer; and this brought
about the end of my industrial branch. Sometimes things
happen in this world that lead to trouble on one side but

on the opposite side bear many benefits. So it went with me.

In our village there were many old houses that had
chimneys or smoke stacks framed out of wood and covered with
straw and clay on the fire side; some were so covered on both
Sides. It happened that a county administrative official,
‘named Scheurermann, made his annual trip for general visita-
tion and inspected all the chimneys. They appeared to him to
be fire hazards, even though some were from two to three hun-
dred years old. He issued a new order that by a certain date
all of the old wooden chimneys were to be replaced by new
ones made of raw.clay brick on the inside and also on the
outside above the roof. Formerly that part had been made
of straw or baked clay.

These mentioned dwellings were mostly in the pos-
session of underpriviledged people. The proposed changes
caused them many worries. Many of them were poor farm
people; and they did not always own their own dwelling but
rather lived there as tenants.

By the clay pits was started the fabrication of the
bricks, with dimensions four inches by eight inches and two
inches thick. I noticed this and thought that there could
be wages for me there. I did not want to spin any longer. I
asked my parents for their permission to do this. To my
pleasure they agreed. A wheelbarrow and shovel were borrowed.
The forms I made myself. Many of the boys of my age started
this kind of work, whereby we became involved in a competi-
tion. We formed a company, and supplied those on the build-
ing site at the cost of ten kreuzer per one hundred bricks.
11

No one was permitted to request less money. On that we had
agreed. A dairyman, Johannes Hauffman, gave me my loads of
straw without my having to pay him cash; while I, for in-
stance, on rainy days repaired for him ladders or dung
boards or other things that were faulty.

To bring improvement to the fabric of the plant I
made myself a double form so that each stroke brought two
bricks instead of one as before. Every one of them wanted
to have such a form. This work fell upon me. I received
12 kreuzer for each form. The worst part of our work was
to get the final material to mix with the clay, the waste
of the broken flax or barley straw. We. were even forced
to gather the needles of the fir trees or of other pine
tress and mix them in.

In spite of all of this work, school was not missed
by anyone. Perhaps there would have been some who would
have been tempted to stay out of school had there not been a
whipping by the teacher to be expected. The teacher, how-
ever, was inclined to protect our work; and no pupil was
allowed to damage our projects even in mischief. Our teacher
was named Daniel Volkmar; and in his youth he had learned the
tailor trade. The teaching position had been inherited by
him from his father. The worst time for us as pupils was to
have to appear in church on Sundays. The church was a great
building of stone, without heat; hence, in the section for
pupils we were after several hours so cold that it became
just like an ice house. As a six or seven year old boy
sitting there for so long often caused me to cry out aloud
because of the pain in my feet.

Our teacher would not have taken the missing of
church because of the severe cold as seriously as my father
would have. I did not dare to miss nor even plead with him
about the matter. He never missed church himself. I remem-
ber that in the summer time, when I was about six or seven
years old, he took me Sunday afternoons and ordered me to
follow him on a walk. We went into the woods where we both
were by ourselves. Usually we went to a hill south of the
village where there was a beautiful view. There at first
would be repeated the questions of the minister from the
catechism. Then, as far as his knowledge could comprehend,
he analyzed the work of the creation; and I learned of the
greatness of the Creator.

Sunday was the only day in the summer time when my
father was permitted to join his family. During the rest of
the week he was employed as a carpenter out of town ina
little village, Gonterskirchen, about an hours journey to
the south of our village. There all the inhabitants were
charcoal burners and were carrying on this business in the
following way.
12

At that time the wood in the great forests of the
Count Solms zu Laubach was of little value. The village
sat in the forest like an oasis. These people now, who
also did a little farming, bought land in those woods and
in an advantageous district were cut several piles of wood.
The forest was composed of beech trees only. One would aim
to be in good standing with the forest ranger and then start
to prepare the wood. During this time one looked around.
Perhaps he would be lucky enough to find many dead trees -..

and other shrubbery that when taken away would not be
detrimental to the forest. In this manner at that time the
coaler used to his advantage three times as much and more
wood than he paid the count for. The charcoal was sold to
blacksmiths within a radius of from fifteen to twenty hours
journey.

Once I talked about this subject to a very old man,
Kurt Lind. He said that the trees did not bloom any more,
and then told me: "Several years ago I was coaling with
several helpers at Hupp, over there near Huppelsberg. I
had bought a quantity of wood and worked there the whole
summer and into the late autumn. I was punished at the
forest court at Laubach with a three hundred gulden fine.
In spite of that I wish for myself wages and earnings like
that every year." With this kind of business these people
were well off; and therefore much was being built in their
village. It was to become the sphere of action of my youth.

Under the above circumstances the days were spent
between joy and sorrow. I had become fourteen years of age;
and the time for confirmation had arrived. School would be
finished; and for me a more serious life should begin. In
school I had taken first place during the last two years;
proof that I had been an eager student. My teacher and my
parents were proud; as a rule children of wealthy people
held that place. ,

In addition to all of the work and studying my
school lessons, I always found time to catch and raise
birds. This, my father always allowed; and it pleased me
that he did. I was not allowed to misuse the privilege
however. It gave Father much joy, when in the wintertime
I caught several chaffinches. In the spring each of these
within his usual large cage would compete with one another.
Larks, starling, and blackbirds I raised from fledglings.
The latter could be taught whistling while the starling is
inclined to mock you. Once my father taught a blackbird
the tune of the song, "My mind is filled with joy, Jesus,
when I think of you."

All of those boyish things were on the day of my
confirmation, Whitsunday; 1825, looked upon as ended. It
has since that time never entered my mind to catch a bird.
There was more important work to be done. The number of
candidates for confirmation at this time was about 24 or
25, led by Pastor Georg Frank.
13

It was determined by my father, and it also was
my wish, that I should become a carpenter. I had looked
forward to this for a long time. At that time there was
a rule with us and in the surrounding area that each trade
should be handed down within a family. So it was with us,
because of my great grandfather, who had been a carpenter
in his hometown of Wohnback in the Wetterau.

It so happened at this time that in our village
there was a man Johannes Jung. In Barthels Haus a two
story barn was built for him by my father, his brother,
and their journeymen. It was ready for assembly and was
scheduled to be raised the Wednesday after Whitsunday.
Naturally I found myself on that spot and helped as much
as I could. By the way, I took care of the hammering of

the wooden pegs. All went well. In a short time the upper
floor was raised. Just as the ridgepole was about to be put
into the rafters, I realized’ that the man who was holding ~ «

the end had lost his courage and was trembling. I sprang
over to help him. At the same moment he let the pole drop
on my head. We both fell, the pole and I, through the
frame; and someone picked us up off the ground. I had not
suffered much except that around my left eye I had been
skinned and bruised. My father believed that I had lost my
interest in the carpenter's trade; and he thought that I
might be interested in another business that would be less
dangerous. I did not lose my courage. My injuries were
not yet healed when one could see me work with my father's
prother, who was also my godfather, at the workshop
swinging an axe.

The two brothers worked together, but my father
always took the rougher and heavier work at strange places.
His younger brother, Konrad, made things a little more
comfortable for himself working in our home village if work
could be found there. To allow me to enjoy some of these \
conveniences my father left me to work with his brother.
Father thought that he was doing me a favor, but in that he
was mistaken. Even though he was very strict in dealing
with me his father's heart was considerably closer in
understanding me than was his brother's. My uncle treated
me according to his frame of mind and without personal interest.

Before I go on to the second period of my life, or
the second chapter of my story, there is still a question to
be answered. What had I really learned in school? I had
studied reading, writing, and arithmetic. Furthermore, I had
learned by heart: first, Luther's catechism; second, the small
catechism plus several hundred added Bible verses; third, one
hundred and four stories from the Bible as told by Johann
Hubner; fourth, thirty and more of the psalms of David; and
fifth, a number of songs out of the old Marburger song book;
also some geography was studied without the use of maps, and
singing was studied, not be note or voice training but by
ear. Oh, how I loved to sing and still do to this day!
14

The writing that I had studied could only be
called copying. A letter of my own I could not write.
I could not even think for myself because everything
had to be grasped according to regulations and in pattern.
In addition to that all of the learning by rote smothers
one's own thinking. One who was proud of the little he
knew, however, learned to take advantage of each oppor-
tunity to enrich his store of knowledge, or better yet
to add still more to that that was once learned. There
was a kind man in our neighborhood, by name Dickel, who
had formerly been a captain in the standing army. He was
quite an elderly man and had had much experience. If
anyone of the poor people in the surrounding villages, as
well as those in his home town, had a problem that required
a petition to the administration or government or as a
Supplicant to Count Solms zu Lauback, this man would be
taken advantage of; and the paragraphs he had written
would be copied. Because officials everywhere came to
recognize his handwriting, he used to have me write instead.
He did not take any payment himself, so naturally there was
not any remuneration in it for me either. I counted myself
paid sufficiently because I was enabled to learn something
about governmental procedures through doing the work. I

learned thereby to write a letter that I did not have to
be ashamed of.
15

ADOLESCENCE

During the first two years, namely 1825 and 1826,
my apprenticeship in the carpentry trade was mostly re-
pair work on old buildings. In Gonterskirchen in the
spring of 1826, however, a new barn was built by the elder
Hannes Kloze for his daughter and her husband. There was
other work in that village including additional work on a
dwelling that had originally been built by my father for
David Graf in 1819 and that had not yet been occupied.
First stairs were made. One oak log had been held back,
and it had to be cut by my father, his brother, and me into
suitable boards. It was rather cold and was late in the
fall; still we were sweating. The log had been cut several
years before and had dried in the sun; this made it hard to
cut in spite of all our effort. This marked the first time
that I had secretly cried during work because it was too
hard and sour for me.

Anyone who would like to judge this kind of work
should do it with his own hands first. He would have to
convert himself into a saw mill. Before one can stand the
work, it has to become a habit. It was worse in the morning
at four o'clock; then I was wakened in the barn and bones
felt as though they were being tortured. They remained quite
stiff until I had been cutting again for a while; this warmed
up the body and by and by everything went the usual way once
more. In short the function of the body as a machine was
regained.

At seven o'clock we were called for breakfast; one
did not wait to be called a second time. Eating was always
done in a hurry; and no rest was taken. At noon dinner was
served; and at three-thirty coffee was served; the latter
was mixed with chicory bark and some bread was eaten with
it. In the evening about nine o'clock, when the first star
was seen or the mark on the block that was being cut could
no longer be seen, we called it a day. Supper was then eaten;
and fifteen minutes later one was asleep in the hay.

This hard work was used by my father as a means to
gain customers and employment. Labor at that time was too
cheap to be competitive with the requests for work. Natur-
ally wages were very low. When we worked by the day for
wages plus meals, the master carpenter received 24 kreuzer,
the journeymen 16 to 18 kreuzer, and I was paid.8.to-..10
kreuzer. The food was the usual farmer's meal, meat being
served two or three times during the week.
16

During this time there was for our family a very
depressing period of three years. My sister, Katharina,
fell ill with a disease that was not known in our part of
the country. It began in the late fall of 1825; and at
first we believed the disease to be the falling sickness
or epilepsy. She threw her body on the ground and her
arms and legs would strike out in all directions. All her
muscles would move out of control. Her tongue would be
cramped and she could not speak. In short, the physical
symptoms were terrible. Father believed her illness to be
epilepsy. An old shepherd was called; it was said that he
had been successful working cures. He tried his art with-
out any success; and said that he could not help as it was
not epilepsy. His statement was true; as we found out later.

Dr. Pfeffer, a good practical physician in our
village, who had studied in Strassburg, was called in. His
patient did not suffer an attack in his presence. We had
observed several times before that as long as a stranger was
present the symptoms would not break out. Father even took
my sister to my aunt, Anna Maria Schmidt. She stayed there
for some time; and while there she did not become ill until
she had been there for two weeks. Then the evil came back
with full force. Dr. Pfeffer wished to observe a seizure,
so Mother took Katharina to him every day. Fourteen days
passed before she fell ill right there. The doctor recog-
nized it as St. Vitus dance of the worst kind, but he could
not help. Dr. Kohler of Laubach was consulted without any
success for a quarter of a year.

When she was in the house, the seizures raged worse.
If I would sing or whistle a tune which she was able to dance
we could hold back the attack for a span of two hours. It
would, however, break out later with severity. The feeling
that she had during the seizures was such that she believed
it started in the stomach. and moved from there first to her
tongue and brain and then to all her limbs. The initial
beginning came as a chill. Because’ she had a scabby head
and had to keep it clean, Mother examined and combed her hair
every day; sometimes against Katharina's will.

?

Since no doctor had been-able to help, we resorted
to quackery and witchcraft; this took all of our earnings
and we had to go into debt. Luckily the nights were quiet,
but as soon as day broke the evil returned. Often our pa-
tient would tell us on awaking how many times during the
day she would not feel well; her count was always correct.

It was worse when all the members of the family were at home.
My grandfather Benzel was often alone with her. Even though
he no longer made his home with us, he often stayed in our
home. Then the attacks would happen only three or four times
during the day. Through several unusual phenomena the evil
could be driven away for a short time. At the beginning of
17

her illness my sister was eight years old; and she had
undergone the above circumstances for two and one half
years.

At this time Dr. Pfeffer was visited by a good
friend and colleague of his, Dr. Biederkopf. He had taken
part in Napoleon's invasion of Russia, serving as regi-
mental physician; and had gained great knowledge. Our
doctor told his colleague about the illness of my sister
and supposedly had a consultation with that other doctor
about her. Father was sent for, and was given instruction
concerning future treatment. The patient had to take for
three months three tablespoons of glaubers salt per day.
This was not effective at first, but nature changed and
the desired laxative took effect.

With all these aversions my sister complied for
a quarter of a year, not without strong measures being
taken by my father from time to time. She continued to
take medication; and the illness began to decrease in
occurrence from day to day until after two months it dis-
appeared almost completely. We were not allowed to dis-
cuss the illness with her for several years. When she was
reminded of it she showed signs of impatience but the
seizures never happened again. She is still living in
Chicago; and is in her sixty-fifth year, very healthy.
I should not have dwelled on this incident so long, but
the unusualness of the disease has caused me to do so.

The year 1827 saw a lot of building being done in
Gonterskirchen. Father undertook to build two new farm-
steads, each with a dwelling and a barn, one for Johann
Konrad Graf and the other for Johannes Lind. The buildings
were made from oak logs that we had to cut; even the roof
rafters had to be cut from one or more oak logs. The wood
was cut in the community wood lot. When the logs were cut,
they were trimmed on four sides and measured in cubic feet.
Cost was three or four kreuzer. This price was very cheap.
During this work and the completion of numerous other
repairs, summer came to an end. In the late fall a community
bak house was built, but I did not help to finish this com-
pletely.

Father let me make at home the machines with which
to spin cotton. To speed up the completion of the ones
ordered, Father came home in the evening to help me get the
work done. In the morning he would return to Gonterskirchen
and worked on the bake oven until it was completed. By
Christmas, I had, with my father's help, made thirty-five
spinning wheels at forty kreuzer each. Every two days I
finished one. After Christmas we became wood choppers again.

About this time Father bought a T square from
Frankfurt, made a new drawing board with attachments, and
18

told me that the time had come for me to learn how to
make a drawing. He had purchased a book, Berger's
KNOWLEDGE OF BUILDING, that contained formulae, building
lessons, and information about the different ways of
measuring. The lessons in this book I grasped quickly.

I enjoyed figuring. I could not, as other teen agers,

go out and have fun. I would have liked to have done so,
but my father always determined the time allotted for
study and that always came before play. I had to go to
church twice on Sunday. Often after church service I was
able to join the group; first I had to solve problems
dealing with square or cube root.

To get drawing lessons in our village was most
difficult. We did not have the means for me to study
in other places. Even my wages were necessary for our
domestic needs. Fortunately a journeyman, a mason by the
name of Martin Boning, came to us from far away. He had
worked several years in Frankfurt am Main and had taken
lessons in drawing from an architect named Strobel. Strobel
had gone with Napoleon to Egypt as a building and landscape
inspector. Boning had been able to study with that man
right there in Frankfurt and had mastered all the drawing
necessary in his chosen trade. Boning, who was unmarried,
spent much time with my uncle; my uncle's wife was born
Boning, and the man was her brother.

My father agreed that Martin Boning would give me
drawing lessons as often as possible. I was now cut off
from all boy's foolishness. During the day I became a wood
chopper and in the evening a drawing pupil. In this work I
did find pleasure; and my friendships outside the family
were almost forgotten because of my schedule. I was, in
fact, proud to be learning something that others who were
my equals had not been able to study. I did not regard
myself as being better than they. During the first few
evenings, in the presence of my teacher, several drawings
had to be copied. This gave me practice to help me under-
stand the handling of the drawing instruments. This I
soon understood. He often brought me something different

to study as an example; then I did not see him for a week
or so.

Since Boning was still a bachelor, one could not
blame him as he now was seeking a wife. This matter was
soon taken care of, although he did not marry in haste.
After he had found what he was looking for, he came to
teach me more often; and our work in the candle light pro-
gressed quite well. On occasion I would undertake a
drawing of a wooden building using my own ideas. Under
these conditions, I spent the evenings drawing in the home
of my uncle, Konrad Daehler, for two winters, 1828 and 1829.
19

My uncle was a widower, having lost his wife a
year and a half previous. He was engaged to marry the
youngest sister of his late wife. The marriage took place
at a later date. He was not yet a master carptenter; and
as long as my grandfather was alive, this was all right.
In 1831 my grandfather died. His two sons, my father and
my uncle, both wanted to carry on the trade on their own.
One of them had to become a master carpenter, for the
carpenter's guild insisted on this.

Both brothers ran their business as partners. My
father decided to leave this to become a master carpenter.
At that time the office of the Grand Duke's building master
did not exist. One had only to apply for one's mastership
to the guild master; the knowledge of much theory was not
necessary. Practically both brothers were fine carpenters.
My uncle, however, required more time to complete his share
of the work than my father did; this made him believe that
his work was much better and of nicer quality. Such was not
the case. He began to think that the nails he had not ham-
mered himself were not driven correctly. This became the
reason that he did not keep the journeymen as busy as they
should have been.

Since it was necessary, my uncle reported to the
guild master at the guild hall located in Laubach to es-
tablish himself as a master. After drawing up an agreement
the guild sent two inspecting masters to observe my uncle
in Freienseen. He constructed for them on paper the skele-
ton of a wooden farm house. When the work was done and the
inspection was finished, the best was not forgotten; there
was a good bite to eat and an even petter drink. A contri-
bution to the guild's fund was made, to which my father
added his share; the knighting was done; and my uncle be-
came an honorable master carptenter. Following the comple-
tion of this act, I took the guild oath as an apprentice to
my uncle. Since I had already worked for several years as
a carpenter, I was released immediately and recognized as
a journeyman.

In the year 1828 we had much good work in our own
village. A new building for Karl Immelt, a cloth and silk
dyer, was erected for his house of business; and I had much
fun in working there. I had a feliow journeyman, Georg
Rister; and the two of us worked together. He was several
years older than I. While doing our work, we sometimes sang
songs. As we were eager workers, my father did not object,
for he also loved singing. The building under construction
was two stories high, and consisted of two wings that were
joined at right angles. The roof over these angles required
two long rafters, one on the hip and one on the valley.
20

My uncle called on me to bring him a piece of
pine wood for the ridgepole; it was to measure approxi-
mately eight inches thick and twenty-four feet long.
This I was to cut square; that I did. This particular
piece of wood was to be cut so that the base became an
angle and really was to be the equivalent of half of a
right angle. I started working eagerly. While I was
working I was thinking about the matter carefully and
arrived at the conclusion that all my work was for nought.
Instead of being a right angle this hip rafter, for that
is what it was going to be, had to be cut on a very obtuse
angle in accordance with the area of both roof sections,
roughly about 135 degrees. I then told my uncle, ''God-
father, I think I am doing the work wrong. It should not
be a right angle." "Ach," he replied, "what do you know
about this? You just go ahead and do as I have told you."
I stood, hesitated, and started to speak against his con-
viction. He nearly slapped me. I therefore kept quiet and
did as he had ordered. It amused me greatly when the piece
of wood that had been finished in accordance with my uncle's
instructions was found useless, and had to be discarded.
The reason that I had second thoughts about the above men-
tioned roof section was due to my drafting work. In addi-
tion, during the year different repair work had been done
in Laudenbach and in Gonterskirchen. The year 1829 was a
depression year and that was the reason that farmers had
nothing built. We cut boards and did minor things as they
came along. My father, his brother, and I were usually
able to do the work by ourselves.

During the period of the last mentioned years an
incident happened that grew to be important enough to affect
my whole lifetime. I do not remember the exact year in which
the dwelling of the master baker Heinrich Jung was repaired.
Under the old roof, we had built new outside walls. My fath-
er and journeyman from Wohnfeld, Peter Pabst, did the work.
It happened one Sunday afternoon after I had come home from
church that my father said to me, "I still have to get from
Heinrich Jung the final part of my wages for the carpentry
on his dwelling. He was not going to have the money avail-
able for me until today. Will you go there and see if you
can get it for me?" The house was unfamiliar to me, and I
was not acquainted with the family either. I knew who they
were, but I did not look upon myself as being their equal.

I was shy with them because of those feelings. I went there
anyway and followed my instructions. Frau Jung and several
of her five daughters were at home. The oldest daughter,
Dorothea, was married.

Frau Jung welcomed me and offered me a seat. I
called her Cousin Louisa; and the good woman was very
friendly toward me. She gave me the money for my father.
I was about to leave when she introduced her youngest
21

daughter, Katharina, who had just written the evangelism
for the Sunday catechism class. The manuscript was handed
to me and I was asked to pass my judgment upon it. Louisa
Jung seemed to be very proud of her daughter and of that
daughter's writing as well. I was impressed by the girl
as if I had been struck by lightning. The young and
innocent blossoming girl seemed like a higher creature as
she stood before me and and such an effect on me that I
was not able to response immediately. I soon gathered my
wits about me, and praised the daughter's writing to her
mother. I had come with a quiet heart and was departing
in unrest.

I was not able to understand myself what had
happened to me. Love? This could not and was not per-
mitted to be. First, I was too young, being 18. Second,
public opinion in our village placed me in the class of
the proletariat, whereby I did not have the right to look
up to a girl who belonged to a middle class family. In
general people were rated in relation to their possessions.
My father was a daily wage earner. Her father owned a fine
farm and had one of the best estates, plus additional capi-
tal. An alliance for love was not considered. In spite of
all that I was not able to forget the incident. I met her
often through mutual friends and her older sisters. I did
not dare cultivate friendship for that would have created
a great disturbance.

It was a custom in our village for young people
to meet during the summer after working hours at a suita-
ble place. There several folk songs were sung; and I was
song leader so I dared not be absent. One of the places
we met in was near the Jung home; especially on Sunday
evenings boys and girls gathered there and sang until ten
o'clock. It was an advantage good for me that Herr Jung
was one who enjoyed good singing. In the winter, when the
Jung girls and their girl friends gathered together in
their home to spin, we found ourselves invited to go there
at eight o'clock. Eight o'clock was the hour for all work
to end. We joked a little and sang, but formal etiquette
was followed. The proof of all this is that the master of
the house often sang with us. He even taught me the melody
of the song, "Jesus, My Bridegroom."

The year 1830 brought us much work. The main task
was in Einartshausen, where the mayor, Johannes Keil, had a
splendid dwelling plus a tailor shop built. This kept us
busy all summer. During this year, our village, Freienseen,
had severe hail storms. Fields were ruined and many trees
fell. East of the village in the public field, Allaugh, two
old linden trees were uprooted. Each measured five or six
feet in diameter. They had withstood storms for centuries.
Finally they were unable to withstand the force of the storm
and bowed to great force. It was believed that those two
22

trees dated from the days of St. Boniface. How many church
services must have been held under those holy linden trees.
Today this site is a market place.

The thirties offered good, even, steady work.
Construction was carried on in surrounding villages; for
example, in our village alone new dwellings were built by
Daniel Stein, Johann Kurt Sauer, and Gottlieb Lutz. Joh-
annes Bachmann was building a new barn. In Weikeitsheim,
in Laudenbach, and in Hinartshausen, new buildings were
going up and there was the usual repair work as well.

For sometime I had continued my exercises in
drawing without a teacher. I had even learned geometry so
that I could find an area, figure it, and then divide it
according to the requirements of the circumstance. A law
existed in our village that anybody who was planning to
erect a building, large or small, had to obtain permission
from the county office. The owner of the proposed building
was required to submit a blueprint and a site location plan.
This meant the drawings of the buildings as well as the
location of the buildings in regard to the neighborhood and
street directions. Plans were to be submitted to the mayor
in duplicate. He in turn sent the drawings to county offi-
cials, administrative offices, etc. If he found the reac-
tion favorable, the aforementioned would receive permission,
at times with limited changes. The original copy remained
in the official office; the other covy was filed with the
mayor of the village or town involved, as a means of control,
On request of the owners of proposed new buildings, I com-
pleted many drawings, blueprints, and site location plans.
These always brought me a good side income. Not to waste
time I often worked at night; only the laying out of the
grounds had to be done during the day. For the particular
correctness of this I am responsible. To work out a site
location plan, already mentioned, one needed an understand-
ing of geometry that I had learned.

The county office had issued a regulation that in
Freienseen, in Laudenbach, and in Ilsdorf, young surveyors
were going to be employed. Actually the surveyors did not
always show up when they were needed. Because of that the
mason Georg Boning and I received from our burgomeister,
Johannes Jung, an offer. If we were interested in becoming
surveyors, he would recommend us and then acknowledgement
from the county office would follow. We, of course, agreed.
We collected the necessary information and studied. We
spent the winter of 1829-1830 so occupied. Both of us were
well acquainted with the forest ranger, Dickel, in Laubach.
I was even working in his range as a woodcutter. We con-
vinced him that he should give us lessons for an hour or
two, two evenings a week.
23

Our wood lot was at that time at the Wetterauer-
berg; and Georg Boning's work was at the stone quarry at
Kirchberg, where the new road to Schotten was built. Both
of us were a full hours walking distance from the Dickel
dwelling at Laubach. As soon as we ended our work in the
evening we each started out separately toward the home of
Forest Ranger Dickel. We did this on Tuesday and Friday
nights. After our lesson was finished we started on the
way home to Freienseen, usually arriving there an hour
later around nine o'clock. We were able to take seven
or eight lessons; and then we had to study by ourselves.
Smoll's book on basic mathematics became our teacher. In
the spring of 1830 we.were ordered to report to Ranger H.
Nathan, who gave us the examination. About a week later
we were sworn in as surveyors by County Officer Schurman
at the county court in Laubach.

At this time I became eligible for military duty.
I had no inclination toward the life of a soldier and
could not be spared at home. My father gave 85 florin
into the society managed by Ernst Emil Hoffman. This had
to be done before selection. To my disgust I drew myself
free. I would rather have had a strike so that the
society would have furnished a substitute as the money
had just been paid. The free lot was just as good.

There were at that time eleven recruits eligible
for military service in our village of Freienseen. The
government did not get one of them as a soldier. I list
them in order: ,

Konrad Bachmann, a weaver who had his own business,
Georg Bar, a mason,

Johannes Beir, a smith,

Johann Konrad Daehler, a carpenter,

Johannes Immelt, a farmer, also known as Black Hannes,
Johannes Lober, jackanapes,

Johannes Lobsack, a miller,

Heinrich Moll, a hog dealer and butcher,

Konrad Sauer, a weaver,

J. Konrad Friebart, a weaver,

Heinrich Volp, at that time a dyer in the cotton cloth
factory of the brothers Arnstein at Laubach.

HFOWUANQuURWNEH

HH

At any rate the lots were favorable. Only Lobsack
had a strike. He was represented by the society, so a sub-
stitute was furnished for him. Thanks to the saving ways
of my parents and the continuous work that we had we were
able to pay back the 85 florin, which we had borrowed from

the widow Zooster.

Mother contributed larger amounts to our family
budget as a midwife than what she had earned spinning
cotton. Unfortunately it was not to be to any advantage
because her arthritic condition became worse. Due, to, this,
counting the advantages of the carpentry business, we be-
came wealthier but not happier.
24

If I am not mistaken it was in the year 1833 that
Johannes Dickel had a new two story house built in Freien—
seen. There was so much work that year that’ we had to split
our man power. I was directed by my father and his brother
to construct the above mentioned building. I was given two
journeymen,- Johannes Pfeiffer and Peter Mulle. This was
the first new building where I was holding the position of
a master and worked independently. We also gained customers
in Laubach, where we kept busy half the summer doing repair
work and straightening out crooked old buildings. Several
journeymen were required. Father was busy with repair work
in Freienseen and in Gonterskirchen.

In the year 1838 a very important chapter in my
life had its beginning. I entered into wedlock with
Katharina Jung. We were married on the eighth of August,
1838. I had not forgotten the incident that took place
between us in the house of her father, the baker Heinrich
Jung and his wife, Louisa.

That we were in love with each other we knew with-
out having to confess it to one another. In society we met
often but thought it wise not to create any disturbance.
There were too many who were jealous of me, especially among
her relatives. Her father did not want her to marry such a
poor young man. She was his youngest daughter and his dar-
ling. Her father had become more fond of me after I im-
pressed him through my behavior, my eagerness, and my desire
to learn. The latter was in our village no common thing.

My parents did not concern themselves with my
affairs. My father's strictness demanded only faultless
behavior. Once gossip had been called to his attention.
Afterward he declared that he did not want his son to go
begging to people where he would perhaps have to expect a
hand out. Here he was very right. I inherited that char-
acteristic from him. Yet, K knew better than any one where
I stood. After I had passed my twentieth year we told each
other of our love and promised that we would wait, hoping
that the opportune time would come. This thought was often
included in my prayers before bed time. Our time did come,
Slowly.

In the fall of the year 1831 Georg Boning and I
had taken over our positions as surveyors in Freienseen,
Laudenbach, and Ilsdorf; we sometimes organized our time
during the week for this work so that our trade did not
suffer any interruption. We found much to do as we had to
regulate in accordnace with the blueprint on file where
the meets and the bounds were indicated. It even happened
On occasion that we started such a task and were not able
to complete it. It had happened in the past that the old
surveyor found it too complicated to regulate building
when the old mark stones had been lost. Instead of sur-
veying to locate the correct points, they obligated them-
25

selves to peaceful negotiations between the parties con-
cerned. This worked but new and different markers were
set up for locations.

Measuring on such a field, we sometimes would
discover that whole new bounds had been worked out on a
blueprint. We were not authorized, without the permis-
sion of the owner, to make any changes; hence, it often
remained the original way. At times those concerned
were very cooperative in regard to drastic deviations.
We in those instances were able to operate in accordance
with the blueprint. This was on occasion the only way
to determine site locations and to end quarrels.

Our earnings were, when we were setting markers,
for the first one placed during the day, 40 kreuzer; for
each one following, 6 Kreuzer. When it happened that no
markers needed to be placed, our fee for one days survey
was 48 kreuzer. For out of town work we charged one gul-
den per day. If the distance were over half an hours
trip, we charged 20 kreuzer additional. Transportation
costs were figured when it involved a whole hour or more.
Property division was paid for by the day in accordance
with instructions issued by the government. We were also
involved when the county court had to settle a dispute or
suit of some kind that involved real estate, then a local

survey was required.
26

FAMILY MAN

Now, to return to the subject of my marriage, and
to relate competely the historical circumstances. I must
state that all the sisters, as well as the mother of the
object of my love, were very fond of me. Only her father
was Still wishing for his darling a partner somewhat more
endowed with worldly goods. In spite of that feeling he
always was friendly toward me. It even happened that after
I had worked in the field during the day for several par-
ties, and in unison with Boning had measured meets and |
bounds and set markers, he sat with me especially when I
came to call in the evening. He discussed with me the work
I had done during the day.

If he had some carpentry work to do, he asked me
to attend to it. It seemed to me almost as if he saw
something uncommon. He never made me feel that I was an
interference with his plans. Only once did he warn his
daughter about me. Probably those who were jealous of me
had their hands in that game. It was my opinion that he
gave thought to it no longer. In the evening he was some-
times in such a jovial mood that we became very friendly
and sang songs together. His daughter, because of formal
etiquette, did not approve. He enjoyed singing even
though he was nearly seventy years old.

Unfortunately he did not live long enough to be
able to welcome me as his son-in-law. It was not long
after those happy evenings that he became ill, had swollen
feet, and showed other Symptoms of dropsy. Through the
wise use of medicine he did not become so seriously ill
that he was confined to his bed. On the fifteenth of
January, 1835, he was taken from this earth by an easy
death.

He left behind a-widow and four unmarried daugh-
ters. The oldest daughter, Dorothea, had been married
before her father's death. Her husband was Konrad Immelt.
She had died of a brain inflamation in 1830, and left two
sons, three and five years old. The second daughter, Mar-
gretha, married soon after her father's death. Her husband
was a Shoemaker in Laubach, where they took up residence.
She was not happy, and died as the result of a stroke
believed caused by this unhappiness in 1837. She was
survived by a daughter, about one and one-half years old.
The third daughter, Anna Elisa, as well as the fourth
daughter, Elizabeth, both married in the year 1836. Anna
Elisa married Heinrich Volp, a native of Freienseen; and
Elizabeth married Louis Jochem, a native of Laubach who
had settled in Freienseen.
27

’ In accordance with the provisions of their father's
will, the sisters divided, with the approval of their mother
the estate left by their father. Volp and Jochem took over .*
the management of the farm, for which they paid jointly 1400
florin. I, as their carpenter, constructed two apartments
in the dwelling in town. By giving up the space that had
been devoted to the bakery, much additional room was gained.
By drawing lots, Volp received the front of the house on the
main street side, and Jochem the part on the side street and
the farm. Their mother chose to live with the Volp couple.
Each decided to set aside a specified amount for the support
of their mother, but she refused to accept money. Volp and
Jochem both farmed; in addition each had another trade.
Jochem was a cooper, and Volp operated a small oil business.

The youngest and still unmarried sister, Katharina,
lived with Elizabeth, She gave to Jochem her inherited
piece of property as a loan to finance his farming, and
lived with them for her room and board. Thus she had a life
free from worries. She earned a good income for herself as
a seamstress, making many dresses for people.

She waited patiently for a suitable time for us to
marry. Frequently she called at our home to visit my mother,
who had been confined to her bed for three years with arthri-
tis. My mother was the reason for my hesitation. I was con-
sidering marriage, but it did not seem to be a suitable time;
and I was embarrassed to discuss the matter with my father.
He was working in Gonterskirchen, and came home on Saturday
evenings only. My uncle and I worked in Laubach. My sister
did the housework and was my mother's nurse. I realized that
the time had come for me to make a decision. I wrote my
father a letter explaining my intentions, and put it in his
waist pocket along with his pocket knife. He found it there,
and thus became acquainted with my wishes.

I was favored by fate. In the month of April, I
fell ill in Laubach and had to return home, when I took to
my bed. My sister cared for me and provided me with the
necessities. I had such a high fever that I was from time
to time out of my head. I would think it was cold, but would
be sweating profusely. After the fever subsided I broke out
with something that looked like small pox. We did not think,
however, that I had that. Several days I remained in bed and
saw no one other than my sister. One day she did not come at
all. Suddenly my father appeared. He told me that my sister
was.to be married that day. Her bridegroom was Christian
Lutz, who visited me in my room that evening. I shook hands
with him and congratulated him as my brother-in-law.
28

It did not take long until my tough nature became
the victor; and I recovered. Soon I was able to swing the
axe once more. My sister wanted to move with her husband
to live with his parents; he was their only son. I did not
have to be the driving force for my marriage. My mother
absolutely had to have a nurse; and no one could take over
this position more suitably than the person who would let
herself be called daughter by the sick woman. I now felt
that I had every right to claim her as my bride. She be-
lieved herself Obligated to take over the honorable but not
very joyful task of caring for my mother, and was willing
to do so lovingly and conscientiously.

Several months passed. My wife's mother was in-
formed of our intentions; and we asked for her blessing,
which was not long in coming. We made our preparations;
and as already remarked, we were married on August 8,
1838. My sister and her husband moved in with his par-
ents; and my wife and I took an apartment with my parents.
My sick mother showed that she was very satisfied with the
care being given her by her new daughter. She was most
happy that she had been able to live to see the fate of
both of her children, as she only wished for their happi-
ness.

Mother had been for over a year so helpless that
she was not able, without assistance, to turn over in her
bed. With every movement she cried out in pain. Gout had
made her an invalid. The leg that was bent and stiff
caused her the greatest pain. By continually being confined
to her bed, her skin became sore. Keeping as clean as
possible was the first task; and in that regard my wife
was a most Suitable nurse. It did not take long before
symptoms of dropsy began to develop. Mother's suffering
was so great that sometimes my father and I wished for her
release by death. Hearts would break in all who saw her
suffering and who realized that her recovery could not be
expected. Her plight continued until November 3rd of that
Same year; at that time she was relived of all suffering
by a peaceful death. The final moments were happy for her.
As she was taking her last breath, she forced out the words,
"Ach, there, my mother and my little Johannes," and she was

- ho more,

After Mother's death, Father did not want to main-
tain the household for himself. Therefore he willed me the
apartment with its contents for a suitable price and re-
served living quarters for himself. Since he wanted to live
with me and my family, he paid for his board. The winter of
1838-1839 showed us that our apartment, consisting of a
living room and bedroom on the second floor, did not provide
enough room for us to live in comfortably. With my father's
approval we sold the house to August Berger, a brushmaker,
29

for 500 gulden; and bought a two story house with a barn
for about 925 gulden from Heinrich Knosp. There was room
for a small garden; this was soon made and proved to be

of great value to us. The dwelling was in need of repair,
carpentry and masonry were required; and we started work
on this almost at once. The reparations progressed so well
that we were able to move in during the fall of that year.
We were very happy in our new home. Father set up house-
keeping for himself in an especially nice room that had a
heater of its own. This had happened to him for the first
time in his life.

Our happiness became even greater when my wife,
on November 9, 1839, placed a little son in my arms. We
asked my father to act as godfather at the christening;
and he named our son Henry Jacob.

Up until now all my wishes had come true and my
happiness was reaching its highest peak, when all at once
a change heppened that threatened my whole happiness. My
brother-in-law, Christian Lutz, came down with a severe
fever. My father and I took turns nursing him at night.
It was at Christmas time. Dr. Steinmetz was his doctor.
One day my sister came to me and complained of chills.
She said that she wished that she could have one sweat
and then go home. At home it was not possible for her
to rest with her husband being so ill. This hit my heart,
and I said, "You may stay with us.'' What I didn't know
was that she too had the fever; and soon my wife came
down with it severely.

This time was for me the hardest proving stone.
The little sprout was eleven weeks old and had to be taken
from his«mother and weaned since the latter was deathly
LLL. I, being very frightened, took care of her myself.
One can imagine that I did not neglect anything and hoped
for the best. My faith was with the All Powerful and the
doctor; and I was not disappointed. Every second day the
doctor came. He was still treating my brother-in-law, who
was by then much improved. The fever had overcome both of
his parents. In spite of everything that was done both of
the parents died within one week.

My father's sister, Anna Maria, and her family were
also infected with the disease. She and her husband, Konrad
Schmidt, along with their son, Heinrich, and his wife, were
engaged in business bleaching. During the winter they wove
cotton. Since it was not possible for my sister to wash at
home, she took her laundry to our aunt, who took care of it
for her. Thus it happened that both Schmidt men, father
and son, died after being ill for two weeks; they were
buried in a common grave. My aunt became ill, but she re-
covered. The young wife and her one and one-half year old
son were also spared.
30

This was for me a time filled with worry and sorrow.
The happiness for which I had fought so hard and reached the
point where it seemed to me that it had been lost. As the
bodies of the Schmidt men were taken to their final resting
place and with the tolling of the church bell, I stood by
the pallet of my delirious and deathly sick wife, the young
mother of our baby. I took care that she should not notice
the tolling of the bell, hoping to prevent her from getting
upset emotionally. To my amazement Mrs. Haderer came into
our doorway and wanted to watch the funeral procession pass
our house. I was shocked, but luckily she took my hint and
began to talk about something else. My wife was conscious
but did not notice the funeral procession nor did she know
about the deathers of our two relatives. My father was with
my sister, who lived on the second floor and who was not
very ill.

I would have liked to have hired some one to help
me with the housework, but who could blame people for want-
ing to stay away from our house? The care of my wife and
our little son, whom I had to give cow's milk, kept me busy.
In addition to that a meal had to be prepared daily, some-
times I made soup for the sick. My sister was able to eat
each noon a browned flour soup, but my wife was seldom able
to eat even that. I also had to feed and milk two cows; and
the little sprout had to be washed and cleaned. I even
washed his diapers. One of my wife's sisters came each
morning and made the bed for her. I could get some rest
only when my aunt, Wilhelmina Benzel, came to relieve me
of my nursing duties. I knew that I could trust her and

that no negligent things would happen while she was here.

She was the one who at last found a person to work
for me on a weekly basis. Anna Elizabeth Bergen was about
50. She did the cooking and the washing. Three or four
weeks passed before, at last, the feverish delirium of the
Sick ceased. Dr. Steinmetz finally gave me the long hoped
for word that my wife was out of danger. My sister was
able to leave her bed. Slowly my wife was recovering. The
storm was over. With quiet and grateful hearts, we again
were able to look ahead with courage and faith that the
guide of fate after this thunderstorm would, for a change,
let the sun shine for us. My sister and the woman whom I
had hired took charge of the household. When my sister
returned to her home, she found her husband was much im-

proved but still weak. Her in-laws had left her an empty
room.

The winter of 1839-1840 I will never forget.
Never in my life have I been so happy, after the overcoming
of disease by my wife. After such suffering by any one mem-
ber of the family, one really feels how the hand of love en-
circles with renewed power the ones who belong together.
During that winter I did not do any outside work as I had
enough to do at home. It still took time for my wife to
31

regain strength enough so that she was able to take care of
little Henry herself. He had been living on milk and zwie-
bach; and often he suffered because of the colic cuased by

this.

When spring came we hired a maid, who during the
year, fed the cows with green fodder and did much of the
necessary work around the house. During the time that my
father and I had been busy taking care of the sick, my un-
cle had accepted, in the spring of 1940, much carpentry
work. The main task was a large barn for N. N. Jochem in
Laubach; at that time he was city treasurer. Also we were
to build a new two story building for W. Bettelhauser to
use for the soap works. There were also other things to
be done in that city; for example, a two story stall for
the glazier, Heinrich Kuhn. That we could call a good year!

For W. Bettelhauser's building we had to furnish
the wood. This we bought from the city of Laubach, which
had a community forest in its possession where we could
buy the wood at a low price. Therefore we could make good
profit. Winter came and we did not have to do much outside.
Instead, using the house as a workshop, we made a variety
of things: stairs for the brothers Hess in Einartshausen as
well as new stairs for the Turner Hannes, etc.

In the spring of 1841 we were again very busy.
The Count Solms zu Laubach had on city property between
Freienseen and Laubach an old brick kiln. This was to be
torn down; and a new larger one was to be built on the same
spot. My uncle signed a contract with the Solms building
supervisor, Loffler, to complete the work. My father and I
began work on it in the month of May. Uncle's mason, Daniel
Boning, and my uncle took over a large area for fire inspec-
tion. They were kept busy at this for two months; this
caused them to be late in completing the carpentry work that
Uncle had undertaken at the request of farmers near Freien-
seen and Laubach. Father was not able to help with the com-
pletion of the new kiln as he was called back to Gonterskir-
chen, where he had found work during the summer.

The brick kiln was left for me to finish; there-
fore I hired four journeymen from Laubach: Peter Laut,
Christ Lober, Heinrich Feindrich, and Nicklaus Hannes, as
well as two others from Sellerod: Heinrich and Johannes
Rister, father and son. When I was ready to raise the
building, I had my father and uncle with their journeymen
to help me. This was good because very heavy pieces had to
be fitted into an opening that required not only strength
but was also dangerous as all of the necessary equipment
could not be had. There was also a dwelling for the brick
maker. The old still very useful wood was again used for
the new construction. Here I found full time work with my
journeymen for the whole year. Drying buildings were
enlarged and improved by new racks, for which we cut the
needed boards out of beech trees. The work with the excep-
tion of that on the new building was paid for ona daily
basis. During the winter about fifty thousand new brick
boards, each 16 inches long, 6 inches wide, and 4% inch thick
were manufactured by me; and my journeymen assisted me in
this. We made and planed them for one gulden per thousand
boards. My father and uncle did not help us as they no
longer wanted to work outside during the winter.

I also found work for the count both in his castle
and on his estates in the neighborhood. In the Obersenner
Hof a new fire house and jail were built; and at the admin-
istrator's dwelling, repair work was done. With two saws,
one that we used at the brick kiln and the other that we
had used in the carpenter's lot at the castle, we cut boards
by hand. I still depended on my uncle, who had become a
master at the guild in Laubach. For things to be right, I
should have been a master myself long before this. Because
of circumstances it had been postponed.

At that time all of the building tradesmen who
wanted to work on new construction had to be examined, under
the extant government, by a trademaster employed by the
county for that purpose. I applied to take this examination
in the winter of 1842 in the county building office at
Gieszen. I was notified that I had to appear on the 15th of
April of this year before the countytrademaster, Muller, at
the castle at Grunberg. Earlier I had become acquainted with
a locksmith, Alles, who also had to report for the examina-
‘tion. I talked with him; and we found another colleague, who
was a locksmith in Grunberg. The two were practicing their
arithmetic. Another, whose name I have forgotten, seemed to
me to be badly informed through means of stereotyped arithme-
tic problems. We went to the castle together; and there we
found well over thirty candidates: carpenters, masons, cabinet
makers, locksmiths, roofers, and coopers. The examination was
only a theoretical one. The first day began with easy arithme-
tic problems. My two Grunberg locksmith friends were able to
follow, and were invited for the next decisive day. About
three fourths of all participants were sent back and invited
to return for the same examination next year. I stayed in
Grunberg overnight. As I imagined that critical arithmetic
problems would follow the next day, I studied and practiced
such problems or similar ones with the two locksmiths through
the night as best we could.

Next day only a few men met. There were two carpen-
ters, the two locksmiths, two masons, about as many cabinet
makers, and one roofer from Grunberg. The latter was the
best problem solver in the group. The other carpenter pre-
sent was M. N. Schmidt from Munzenberg. The problems were
on space and mensuration plus square and cube roots. The
locksmiths, for example, were asked how many pounds of iron
would be necessary for an iron gate of certain dimensions
if one cubic inch of iron weighed one loten. The carpentry
33

problems concerned tree trunks and estimating building con-
struction costs as well as Pythagorian theorem. One question
asked was to find the length of a rafter on a pitched roof by
determining the square root. The reason all of these prob-
lems seemed easy to me was due to the fact that I had during
the last ten years used all of them on a practical basis in
my trade as well as in my work as a surveyor. My report

from the county building supervisor at the end read, ''good,
passing."' They then gave me the problem for my practical
mastership; I had four weeks in which to deliver my solution.

The problem consisted of drawing a sketch of a farm
building, 50 feet long, 40 feet wide, with a sketch for each
of the two floors, front elevation, side elevation, as well
as a sectional lengthwise and in width, scaled to one one-
hundredth of true size. A model of the roof according to
the newest system, one-twentieth true size was to be
included. The sketches I made easily, but the model took a
great deal of time. The guild at Laubach was requested to
send a viewing master to certify that I had done every bit
of the work myself. I had a cabinet maker prepare the
wooden parts for my model at the stated dimensions; otherwise
I could not have completed it within the set time. I could
not totally abandon my business as that was my livelihood;
and I had to keep the journeymen busy.

I was glad that I was able to deliver the material
within the set time. My instructions were such that af- 1
did not present material within the prescribed time it would
be looked upon as though I had not been able to solve the
problem. A continuance of the set time would have been
granted had I asked for it, but I was too proud to beg and
I had no money to pay. I went to hand in my completed work
but did not find the county pbuilding supervisor at home.
Four weeks later I received from the county administration
office at Hungen the notice that my work had been received.
I was told that the work was not too good. In order that
I might be declared a master I had to satisfy the Laubach
guild and pay to them my membership dues. I took care of
this matter quickly.

No longer did I depend on my uncle; however, it
never occurred to either of us to dissolve our partnership.
The count's building supervisor, Loffler, gave me so much
work for the count that I was kept busy the entire year,
winter and summer. During the winter boards and blocks

were cut. Trees had to be cut in the forest for this, and
were then brought to the carpentry shop. Transportation
was supplied by the farmers near Laubach. In exceptional

cases transportation was furnished by those near Obersenner
and Flensinger Hof.
34

Cutting boards was paid for at the rate of one
florin and thirty kreuzer per one hundred square feet.
As every log had to be cut on four sides, four Kreuzer
were added per running foot.

The year 1843 was bearing fruit in accordance :
with my becoming a master. The county building office in
Grunberg had been set up by the government; the county
building supervisor, Holzappel, was in charge. Contracts
were to be issued through this office for the construction
in the community of Bubenhausen of three new parishes,
dwelling, barn and livery sheds through public bidding.
The contractor was expected to furnish building material.
The bidding was a negative one. As a result of the auc-
tion the lowest bidder was promised the contract with the
condition that the county building supervisor had the
right to choose anyone among the three lowest bidders.

It was arranged that the master carpenter Bast of
Gieszen would make the lowest bid, 128 florin more than
the estimated cost of all buildings. We entered into part-
nership so that Bast would take care of the dwelling, master
carpenter Ilaas from Grunberg the livery, and I the barn.
Oak wood for construction I obtained in the forest of the
Count Solms zu Laubach; the soft wood came from Hanau.
Repair work on the church was offered me by the county
supervisor and I undertook to complete that. Father and
I worked mainly on the barn; and my uncle worked on the
church. Inflation was a problem so we, together with our
journeymen, were most happy that we had regular work.

It was impossible for me to help complete the
barn. I was called to Laubach to do work for the count;
and I did not want to lose his business. The count
intended to restore the gypsum mill and to reconstruct
the whole power plant. For this the old water wheel had
to be taken out and disposed of and a new one had to be
constructed. It was made -- about 24 feet high -- from
usable oak trees cut in the forest in the presence of the
forest ranger. At the building site those trees were cut
into boards as the task required. Meanwhile the building
supervisor had employed a millwright to supervise the work,
but the two of them were unable to reach agreement. The
supervisor complained about this matter to me and asked if
I were able to take over the work. He desired that I do
this task for daily wages. I replied that I had never been a
millwright, but if they would instruct me what to do, I
was hoping that I would be able to do the job. He told
me that several cog power wheels had to be made; and that
required much thought. As he had no millweright who under-
stood his requirements, he thought I should take over. I
remained silent, thinking over what I ought to do.
35

I immediately went to the butter buyer in our
village as he had to go to Frankfurt that week, and had
him order for me from a book store a book on machine
construction. He obtained and brought back with him a
copy of Haindel's MASCHIENEN KUNTE. This work became a
teacher for me as well as for the building supervisor,
Loffler. Work was begun. I retained several journeymen
for the construction work and requested a millwright to
build the water wheel. Johann Klosmiller was sent; he
was born at Sellerod and had married in Lauter. I had
to pay him a daily wage. The journeyman I picked for
this task was Johannes Kieckhofer, a native of Eichenhain
who went to America in 1846. The other fellow, Jacob
Buttrow, came from Standechs, and was still an apprentice.
It turned out that he was not suitable for the work. Con-
struction lasted until winter, when one started to grind
and plaster. After completion of the machinery no more
work was required of the millwright. Work was still done
by me; and my people continued to work at their tasks.

It came to pass that a new threshing machine
operated by the water of the river Wetter, was built in
Muhl Baderich, in the Kloister Arnsberg. Power was
transmitted by a special water wheel through several shafts
in an underground tunnel to a large barn near the gate
building. There the threshing machine was constructed on a
threshing floor. To complete the models of the cast iron
wheels, a room in the count's castle was prepared to serve
us as a workshop. The pbuilding supervisor also employed two
cabinet makers, the master Wilhelm Frank and one journeyman,
who helped to complete the models. I was always busy planning
and constructing the power wheels in which Loffler associated.
The wheels were cast at Friedrichschutte. If at all possible
we scheduled this work for winter when one preferred to keep
busy in the workshop. My two journeymen, who were selected
for this, took advantage of it more than I did. As soon as
the building wood arrived, I believed myself obligated,
along with one or two men, to help the haulers, particularly
when the weather was bad. As soon as I had assembled the
machine in the fall and had it in shape for threshing -- the
cylinder made 1600 r.p.m. -~- threshing was started and
proved satisfactory for everyone concerned.

By now the Grand Duke's building officials had
become acquainted with the work done by my father, my uncle,
and me. They also knew that we produced things of good
quality. Consequently we received from the county construc-—
tion superintendent a job in Ulrichstein that we undertook
at the price of the pre-estimate. Due to the elimination
of the tithe, one of the Grand Duke's fruit storage build-
ings had become superfluous. This building was to be re-
modeled into a studding stable. Likewise, changes were made
in the old stables. Thus it became an important job.
36

In February, 1844, my uncle and I went to Hanau to
buy logs from the firm of Dainer Brothers. The logs were
brought by wagoners from Hanau to Ulrichstein; some wére to
be delivered in the spring, the rest came in the winter. We
subcontracted for this hauling in Hanau. I, myself, did not
go along to work there. My father and uncle looked after
that as I had too much to do in Laubach. Part of the time
Father also worked for farmers near the various villages.

My uncle, however, stayed so long near Ulrichstein on that
job that he, during that same summer, took over remodeling
an old building into a synagogue. The latter job had been
given him by the Grand Duke's construction supervisor,
Posainer. On this job he contracted small pox, and was
taken home very ill. I was good enough to finish the work
that he had started. The first thing I had to do was to
tear down the pillars for the choir loft. At that time I
took Christian Bachman with me as an apprentice. He caught
on right away. taking the task of holding and turning spoon.
It took less than another two weeks and the Jewish temple
was completed in so far as the carpentry was concerned.

During this time Father worked on a new residential
building in Laubach for N. N. Bihauser, but Uncle was not
able to do any work at all that fall. After his convales-
cence he became a fire inspector for the villages around
Vogelsberg.

In 1845 another turning lathe, driven by oxen, was
built in our workshop in the count's Laubach castle for the
improvement of the economy of the Utpher Hof in the Wetterau.
There we also built in a barn a mill that was driven by a
winch that in turn was horse driven. In addition to the
building of these machines the remaining carpentry was
finished by seven of our journeymen. Work on wooden pumps
was also given me; for example, in Flensinger Hof, Otterbach
and Pfardendorfgill. In the distillery at Arnsberger
Kloister we also drilled the pipes. During the years 1845
and 1846 great changes and repairs were made in agricultural
buildings, and particularly to the Flensinger Hof stables of

the Count Solms. There I always found enough work to keep
three men busy.

?

The mill of the Kloister Arnsberg was entirely re-
done in 1845. Actually the ageless gears were removed; and
the mill works were geared for three milling speeds with
the driving wheels to be put in motion by a large wheel.
Construction was conical. We completed the work in the shop
in the castle yard at Laubach and on a barn threshing floor.
We put everything together and got it so far that if one
were to turn the large wheel by hand all of the gears would
begin to turn. By the time we brought the machine to its
location, Loffler had already secured the milling stones.
We were able to proceed and put everything together
right there. The corona of the large wheel had a
diameter of seven feet; and the shafts were from eight
to nine feet long’ and seven inches in diameter. It
took much work to get everything in its proper place.
The teeth of the large wheel were made of wood; the
"scheift" was three inches. It took three weeks of
work before we were able to say that we were ready to
start to grind. A mill supervisor by the name of Rend
and a miller by the name of Zerb were employed. The
latter was a married man and had a family.

While we were on the job in the Kloister, we
boarded with Philip Hensel. He was a fancy dyer, and
had brought all of the dyeing equipment from the Sepa-
ratists who had emigrated to America. He had taken a
lease from his honor, the Duke of Solms, ona building,
where up until this time the dyeing business of the
Count of Solms had been done. In addition to the dyeing
business, Hensel ran a general store - grocery and
tavern.

During this period several repair jobs were
done for citizens in the town of Laubach. Upon the
suggestion of the Count's wife, Princess von Neuwied
of the house of Furst von Neuwied asked us to erect
a building to be used as a school for small children.
The work my father did, I have partially forgotten,
but I do know that he and my uncle completed various
reapirs in the villages of Freienseen, Laudenbach,
and Gonterskirchen. Thus passed the year 1845.

In 1846 we began work on a threshing machine
for the estate at Munzenberg. This we completed. We
were able to use some of the models for the Utpher
machine; and that saved time. During the year we built
two English barns and granaries: one on the Obersenner
Hof and the second toward Wernings near Gedern.

On the Wiesenhof near Ulrichstein, belonging
to the director of finance, Klenze, my journeymen and
I constructed a stable in 1845 and a new barn in 1846.
For the aforementioned stable we used material from
an old barn that had been torn down in Feldkrucken.
The outside walls of the stable were of stone; and
stone was also used around the barn door. Window
frames were made from sandstone from the quarry of
the Riedefels near Lehmehausen.

My uncle built for Christian Keil in Einarts-
hausen in 1846 a barn and also did various jobs on the
estate Clemeny Hutte. The proprietor was N. N. Daun.
This estate was near Einartshausen.

37
38

On our threshing machine there was no fan mill.
The next winter was spent in the Arnsberg Kloister con-
structing such on the local machine. What we made during
that winter, however,..was torn out’ the next winter. That
is to say that during the winter of 1846-1847 we changed
everything around because the first construction had not
proved to be satisfactory. The second then was sufficient
for the clearning of all kinds of grain.

We built for the beer brewer, Nathan, who was_
renting the count's brewery, a grinding mill, driven by
water wheel and gears. Attached to the gears was a small
circular saw with which barrel staves were cut. At one
time Nathan had agreed to deliver a load of barrels to
Gieszen to be used for the manganese that a lawyer by the
name of Briel had mined near Gieszen and had promised to
ship to France. After the transaction had been made, the
lack of transportation and the time element prevented the
delivery from being made. Nathan decided that he was in
need of a new saw and had one constructed. The building
of the mill as well as the machine, which was to be driven
by an undershot water wheel, were given to me to be carried
out at the beginning of February, 1847. The building site
was in the south east of Laubach on the so-called Steinbach.
For this again I had to employ journeymen who could do mill
work construction for I could not stay there all the time.

That winter the weather was not favorable. In
March it became so terribly cold that it was impossible
to work. It was not until the end of April that the build-
ing itself could be started. This was completed very quickly
by our mason and roofer, but two months went by before any
boards could be cut. I had my hands full with work for the
count. The big job consisted in the manufacture of a load
of railroad ties that had been taken over by the count's
chamberlain, Klenze. These were to be taken to Nauheim to
the estate castle in the province of the elector. For this
we had to fell oak trees and haul the wood. That always
meant that I had to be there in order to prevent damage.
We always cut continuously with three or four long saws;
there was much waste, from which barrel staves were made.
The staves were needed as there was a good fruit crop that
year; in fact, I had never seen such an abundant crop.
Some of the staves were sent to the Kloister Arnsberg.

There was much work during this year. One time I
by myself had to make a special small water wheel that was
used to drive the apple cider mill. One must not be sur-
prised to learn that at the Kloister Arnsberg there were
stored about 40 to 45 barrels of six ohms each of apple
wine.
39

Regarding the delivery of the railroad ties, old
oaks were felled and prepared in the districts of Eselskopf,
Sheppmanduchung, Bruhl, and Birkenwald. Many trees were
felled and cut that were not accepted to use of the afore-
mentioned ties. That wood was sold in the Zimmerplatz in
Laubach, part of it to the residents of the town and the
rest of it to the farmers living in the neighboring villages.
Buyers paid from 15 to 20 kreuzer per cubit foot. A part of
the lumber had been set aside and was stored for the count's
future needs.

In the districts mentioned above not one of the
old oaks was left standing as they were no longer of value.
The new stand was composed of beeches of six to nine inches
in diameter. At any rate this left the count with less
than 20 oaks over 100 years old in all of his forest land.
Those that had been cut for the ties were all from 400 to
500 years old.

During the year; major repair jobs were completed
on the Neuhof mill near Ruppertsburg. Horloff's Mill,
which at that time was still the property of the count,
was repaired by our mill personnel. Later the mill was
sold as it did not bring in much revenue. My father's
work was in Einartshausen, where he built a house for
Johannes Merker and did other repairs. In 1848 the house
on the Neu-Wiesenhof estate was covered with drop siding
that we had made by hand.

The price of groceries went up tremendously in
1847; because of that it seemed that a day laborer earned
very little. For this reason the chief clerk, Klenze,
obtained permission from the count to build a pond on the
Obersenner Hof. I was to construct the lock and gate for
the diversion of the water. I also built several wooden
bridges and did minor carpentry work on the Holding Otter-
bach. A pipeline for the mash used in the distillery was
made, and a pump was installed. In the winter of 1848 we
repaired pig pens and other things at the Kloister Arns-
berg. New flour bins were made and the old ones were re-
paired at the mill. In the carpentry shop at the Laubach
castle we worked on a gear train for a grist mill at the
Hof Munsenberg. ;

Due to the revolution in March the work on the
Munzenberg estate was not finished. The frame and the
accessories were sold to the brushmaker, August Berger,
in Freienseen. I installed the machine for him; this
machine worked the turning lathe and drill. To put a
roof over the machine we had to build a new building
close to the living quarters. In the same year the Count
Solms zu Laubach had several more carpentry tasks done;
those were absolutely necessary, as the living quarters
40

for the brewer and the brewery itself had to be finished.
Superintendent Loffler did everything possible to make work
for the indispensable journeymen, even having the rotting
boards in the horse stables replaced with new ones. Garden
pots for the orangery and compost bins were made. Two barns
on the Neuhof by Ruppertsburg were burned down by arsonists.
Carpenters were employed to rebuild them. Out of respect
the job was given to the master carpenter, A. Diehl, who
lived in Ruppertsburg. While the work was being done, one
man lost his life.

During this year the work being done by my father
was in Einartshausen; there he made major repairs to the
living quarters of Under Forester Wagner. The living quar-
ters of the latter were in the gamekeeper's cottage near
the Kirchberg.

For some time my father had been in poor health.
He had pain in his right side under his rib cage. This
pain subsided at times, but eventually became worse. He
thought that perhaps he had lifted something too heavy
for him. A doctor was consulted and was given the above
information that caused him to make an incorrect diagnosis.
At last after numerous examinations the doctor determined
that it was cuased by a weakening of the liver. Diagnosis
was made too late; and my father could not be saved. He
passed away shortly before Christmas. He had been born
January 24, 1788, and was sixty and one-half years old.
His father, Jacob Daehler, was born in Wohnbach in the
Wetterau. My father's mother was born in Freienseen; her
maiden name was Stein. The carpentry trade had been handed
down in the family.

I do not remember exactly what work my uncle was
doing during the years 1847-1848. If I am not mistaken
he worked in Freienseen and in Sandenbanch. For sometime
he was in Sellerod doing repair work. He was not able to
do much carpentry because of his duties as fire inspector.
He and Martin Boning did the appraising for the taxation
of buildings in the county. He employed a journeyman, who
did most of the carpentry.

Now I shall return to family affairs. My wife
began to regain her strength; and without help was able to
care for our little visitor of the world, Henry, our first
child; and attend to household chores. We had much acreage
and meadow land, where we sometimes had two or three cows
grazing. Thus there was a great deal of work for my wife
and our maid, especially during the summer. For planting
we hired and paid Konrad Immelt, who was the husband of
my wife's dead sister. I left the farm management to my
wife, firstly, because I did not have the time to attend
to it; and secondly, I did not understand much of it well.
41

She and her sister, Anna Elisa Volp, had learned much
about this from their father through his farming; and
they felt at home. For harvesting and threshing we hired”
day laborers, who were always available. Our son, Henry,
grew, much to our joy, to be a strong child even though
he never had mother's milk. In the winter of 1841 he
suddenly became very sick. I went to Laubach in the mid-
dle of the night to get the doctor. Henry had a high
fever. The doctor attended him; and in two weeks he had
recovered.

On January 20, 1841, a baby girl, to our great
joy, was born. She was baptised on the 3lst, and was
given the name Christiana. My wife's sister, Anna Elisa
Volp, and my sister, Katharina, were godmothers. The
child was so weak that we did not think she would survive.
She died on May 16, 1841.

It is impossible to describe how happy and con-
tented the Sundays were in our home. My wife attended
to the garden and had a variety of flowers. Since we had
always lived in the middle of the village before, we had
never had the pleasure of having a garden. Father and 1
did not come home during the week until Saturday night.
On Sunday, after church, we enjoyed in happy contentment
our flower garden. My wife really had much more to do
than care for a flower garden, but it lay in her good
nature to do so. She still does this at age 70. She and
the maid had much work to do in the fields, in the vegeta-
ble garden, and in caring for the live-stock. Feed for
the cows had to be mowed and carried home. After that the
mown field had to be fertilized with manure. Manure was
carried in a tub on one's head; even the burgomeister's
wife was not ashamed to do that. To mow the hay and the
second crop, it had to be cured. This was done by turning
it many, many times until finally it was dry. She also
had the loading and unloading to do. When it came time to
harvest potatoes, I employed a few helpers.

So the year passed,.and winter came. For every-
one in the family days were filled with household duties.
My wife and our maid were busy spinning, knitting, and
sewing. Father made furniture: cupboards for the kitchen
and wardrobes in which to store clothing. Only my humble
self had to work outside. Even when the weather was bad
I usually went to Laubach in the morning or into the woods
to load logs. I wanted to keep all the work I was asked
to do for the count; in order to do that, I had to be punc-
tual. This became second nature to me so that I found it
impossible to do otherwise.
42

And then came the month of May in the spring of

1842, when on the 26th of that month my second son was born.
He was baptised on the 12th of June by Pastor Zockler. His
godfather was our brother-in-law, Louis Jochem. The tiny
infant was christened Louis Christian. The baby's mother
was well and we felt very happy. The companionship of the
two little ones gave their mother much pleasure even though
they brought many worries. My wife found plenty to do in
the kitchen; she cooked for the day laborers who were hired
for field work and for the carpenters who cut boards for me.

I established a wood shop where I could saw two
inch oak and pine boards for building stairs. I also made
them out of larch and birch wood. The timber I got from
Count Solms. I seldom bought trees other than birch.
Whenever the forester sold trees to anyone or had them cut
for the count's use, there usually was left from the cut-
tings timber in various sizes: for example, 10, 15, 20, or
as much as 25 inches thick. This I bought for five or six
kreuzer a cubic foot. They were made into fine boards for
furniture. Often in the village a job would come along to
make stairs; it was good to have sufficient wood on hand.

The years 1842 and 1843 passed without additional
unusual happenings, other than the fact that 1843 was a
year of scarcity. A simmer of rye cost six gulden. I
bought the flour that we needed from the mill at Kloister
Arnsberg and had it charged against my account with the
Count Solms. A wagon from-there arrived at the Laubach
castle each week bringing flour for the officials there.
After harvest we managed to get along without buying any,
but were able to use our own. Our threshing was done by
two hired day laborers. Our grain crop was not enough
for the entire year due to the number of boarders.

Then came 1844 and again another member was added
to our family. On the 3rd of August, our daughter, Wilhel-
mina, was born. She was christened on the 18th of the
month. Katharina Benzel and Christiana Daehler were her
godmothers, and they selected her name. The latter was
from Michelstadt in the Odenwald; and she was a daughter
of Philip Daehler, my cousin, who was chancellor of the
exchequer at the court of Count Erbach, and happened to
be visiting us at the time. Christiana's relationship to
me was that our grandfather's were brothers. Her grand-
father, Johannes, came from Odenwald to visit my grand-
father in Freienseen, where I saw them both. It was in
1823, I believe. They met for the last time in their
lives; and on that occasion both of them had a good
snoutful.
43

My wife and I were at this time at the height of
our happiness with our young family, in which my father
was also included. My wife inherited from her parents a
beautiful meadow in Waldbezirk, about a rifle shot from
the Schreiner mill. The meadow was watered from the mill
race; and we were able to raise about two crops of hay and
a good second crop. I bought several adjoining parcels of
land, and turned them into meadow and pasture. The whole
area made up ten Darmstadter morgen. We had to pay dearly
for the delivery of hay. Also we had other light things
to haul. Because of that my wife thought it would be a
good idea to buy a light wagon and some field equipment.
She wanted to employ a stronger maid so that she could
attend to the farm work herself.

This proved not to be as easily done as she had
thought because we had eleven or twelve parcels of land
in the Ortsgemarkung. Il suggested that we hire a male
hired man to work by the week, but she did not want to
do that. She thought that she would not be in charge
when I was away from home; she feared that the hired man
would take over. She and her sister had always managed
the work at her parents’ farm; and she believed that she
and the maid ought to be able to manage our place, where
there was not as much work. 1 bought a wagon and field
equipment, and had a plow and harrow made; in that regard
her wishes were fulfilled. Our cows were yoked, and my
wife became the husbandman.

I have had cause to regret this a thousand times.

I should have employed a man and should not have let my

wife have her way. In short she drove oxen and had at times

to deal with wild and unruly cows. The first results showed

up when on the 20th of October, 1846, at three o'clock in

= the morning a third baby was born. He was baptized as an
emergency precaution at nine o'clock by Pastor Blumhof; the
child became a corpse at eleven o'clock. My aunt, Anna
Maria, gave him the name Frederick. Still it had not oc-
curred to me that the reason for the early death was the
hard work my wife was doing. It did not dawn on my mind
until a similar event occurred. I believe this was in 1848.
This time, however, the child was still born; furthermore,
my wife developed a hernia when she lifted our plow out of
a furrow. She had to wear a truss. I hoped that she now

—~ would give up driving oxen and doing the farm work. She
would not do this. She rather hoped that our son, Henry,
would help. He was a lively boy and had been of real
assistance to his mother in handling the oxen, the wagon,
and the farm chores.

The spring of 1846 was a depressing and sorry one
for us. Both of our boys came down with a skin rash in
March. They did not have to stay in bed, but were able to

44

be up and about in their room. One day they complained
about having sore ‘eyes. Our son, Louis, became so ill
that it frightened us. We wished that the daylight would
hurry. The next morning we had Dr. Steinmetz come. After
he had made an examination he told us that he was certain
the one eye would be lost but that there was no cause to
worry about the other. He was convinced that the other
eye could be saved and that the power of both eyes to see
would be transferred to the remaining one. In the eye
that was lost a tumor developed; this pushed the eyeball
out of its socket. Through his dexterity the doctor suc-
ceeded in pushing the eye back into its proper place. The
other eye, gradually overcoming the danger, was restored.
Henry did not have his eyes effected but the disease left
him, much to our annoyance, with an unusually thick upper
lip. For that Dr. Steinmetz prescribed bathing it ina
salt solution that had to be applied for an hour at a time
and that had to be continued for several months until this
too was healed. So did the days alternately pass through
light and shadow; the weeks became years; and the years
passed on; from whence one can not order them to return.

In this way came and went 1848, the year of the
revolution. For the common people in Germany this was a
thing unusual and surprising. We read the first news of
this in the newspapers, and were amazed. One thought he
could not trust his own eyes -- perhaps he had read
incorrectly. Such incidents in ordinary life one thought,
especially in Germany, to be quite impossible.

On this occasion many people, especially those
who were not certain what they wanted, let themselves,
in their dream of freedom, be moved to do things and to
accept things that were to become most disadvantageous
for society. Everyone went and demanded relief from
those by whom he thought himself to be oppressed. In our
village, Freienseen, we too felt many pressures on the
part of the Count Solms zu Laubach. The boundaries of our
common land on the eastern and southern sides were sur-
rounded by the Count's forested properties. Furthermore,
many villages had meadows that were within the forest
boundaries. In this case the count had explicit right to
use the meadow to pasture his flocks of Sheep; this he had
his shepherds do. The farmer, however, was not allowed to
let his cattle graze on this property. If on occasion an
accident occurred at the time of haying or bringing in the
gleanings and cattle broke loose from their yoke to enter
the meadow, then the agents of the count found out who the
farmer was and reprimanded him, sometimes inflicting severe
punishment upon that farmer. This was called a court. On
farmers' meadows there were also willows and alders that
the farmer could not cut. I once saw a man by name Heuschler
from Laubach fined 70 gulden because he had cut on his meadow
45

at the Obersennergrund 70 pieces of alder rungs, about 4
inch thick at the butt end and three feet long. Since he
was not well to do, he directed to his emincence, in most
obedient submission and in most dying reverance, a sub-
missive memorial with a humble request. The fine was
cancelled most graciously.

In many places the edge of the forest had grown
across the boundary so that a significant amount of tim-
ber was standing on the farmer's meadow; yet he was not
allowed to use it under threat of punishment in the state
penitentiary. When the count's forester judged the time
to be right, it was cut down; and the charcoal burners
made it into charcoal in the summer. This took place on
the farmer's meadow. Normally for this purpose a spot was
chosen other than the one on which the timber stood. It
was not possible to sue in the devil's court. We also had
a larger area of community forest, in which the count chose
to do his hunting as well as fishing in the lake and at
Seenbach. All of these and other objections were considered
burdens and were elicited in our village as such. A lot of
noise was made, but nothing was achieved. The mayor and the
council should have been the ones to straighten the matter
out; they should have at least felt responsible to try. The
mayor, however, considered his responsibility to put into
effect and enforce the police regulations, even where they
were not necessary. He, as well as several of our most re-
spected men, felt quite uneasy about the rights of poor la-
borers and day workers. They were afraid in those times of
unrest, and feared assassination attempts by the proletariat.
One could not find in any of these people, one who wanted to
do something to correct the situation.

Georg Boning was a member of the village council.
I talked things over with him; and came to the conclusion
that we should submit our demands in writing, through a
committee elected for the purpose, to Count Solms, who was
at that time staying in Darmstadt on business. We let our
decision be known; and soon the agitation died down. We
asked several other reasonable men to meet at August Berger's
place to clarify the demands we intended to set down in our
petition. For that purpose I wrote down on a sheet of paper
the beginning of a letter that would summarize what the peti-
tion was all about. In a dignified manner it stated our de-
mands in a tone sounding like a formal petition. The
committee consisted of August Berger, a brushmaker; Martin
Boning, a mason; and a third one whose name I have forgot-
ten. Four days later word came back that the count was
willing to meet our specific demands; for example, timber
belongs to the owner of the land; timber along private
property or land parcels should be cut down in a width of
approximately one rod; a property owner should be able to
46

remove from his land all timber and brush, and use it for his
own purposes. Concerning the pasturing, his statement was
not definite; however, it was satisfactory enough so that for
the time being peace was restored. Concerning hunting and
fishing, he referred us to a law that was pending in confer-
ence in court; he recommended that we wait for the outcome of
this hearing, and promised to do all he could to advance our
interests in this matter. He did keep his word. Hunting and
fishing could be carried on within the community boundaries
in accordance with the law; and after it went into effect,
the law would apply within the whole community, but it was
necessary to be licensed to hunt or fish. The display of joy
and thanks the crowd gave to the count upon the return of the
committee was an even greater sensation than the one when we
first made our demands. Even the committee members beamed
with pride because of the count's high regard for them. He
had called them repeatedly men of honor, which of course

they were.

All complaints concerning this had by now been
resolved, but soon there were others. Another law passed by
the same court created a governmental administration in every
provincial city consisting of four officials, excluding the
county administrators. In order to create a counterpart to
the government administrators, there was established a body
of citizens, chosen through election to serve on a committee
that was given the title of a district council. The members
were to appear in the provincial capital at an appointed
time for the purpose of revising the limited budgets and
regulations established by the governmental administrators.

There was another circumstance that kept peopvle in
our community excited long afterward. That was that in the
latter part of the 1830's a highway was built from Laubach
to Fleinsingen by the federal authorities; and the road
went right through our village. Due to this the old bridge
across the Seenbach was torn down and a new one built. The
land used, in this instance, had been purchased by the gov-
ernment from the country folk with the exception that a
piece of ground belonging to the community had not been paid
for. The result was that the government owned several feet
of land on both sides of the road shoulder, as was the situ-
ation with the bridge. After completion of the new bridge,
the roadbed was one and one-half feet lower than that of the
Old one. The river bed was accordingly deepened. Approxi-
mately thirty rods upstream from the bridge there was a
grist mill, owned by Johannes Jung. It had been in his
family for many generations, some said as many as sixteen
or seventeen. He took advantage of the opportunity and had
the deepening of the stream bed continued up to the wheel
of his mill. This was done at his expense. Shortly after-
ward he installed a new mill wheel that was three feet
taller than the old one. Only after everything had been
done at the mill did it begin to dawn on the farmers that
47

no longer would water collect in front of the new bridge
as it had done previously in front of the old one, which
had in addition a small dam about one foot high. In the
past the water at the bridge had resembled a sizeable
pool, where one could water cattle, ride horses into so
that they would be cleansed, and soak the wagon wheels
that had been dried out by the sun. One now saw all of
those conveniences gone. It was then that the village
council, with the mayor as their head, should have looked
after the interests of the community and should not have
allowed those rights to be trampled upon. One thould re-
member that in this case the mayor, Johann Konrad Volp,
was related to the owner of the mill. His wife was a
sister of the miller's mother-in-law; and they, as daugh-
ters of the previous owner of the mill three generations
back, had been born at that mill. The community council
consisted mainly of people whom the miller called cousins;
and the remaining ones could be counted on only as figure
heads. Thus the interests of the community had been
deliberately neglected.

In its ferment, the year 1848 brought this un-
resolved situation once more into prominence. The beams
of the old dam still floated lazily on the opposite
shore, waiting for the things that were yet to happen.
Then, in April of the same year, a group of young men
went to the above mentioned place, fetched the old dam
beam from its resting place, to place it at the foot of
the wall across the bridge, where they fastened it as a
boom. Here it was on government property; and this was
against the law. The matter was reported to the mayor
and to the proper authorities, who subsequently gave the
order to remove the beam aS soon as possible. The mayor
had this hurriedly attended to by members of his staff.

Meanwhile I had circulated in the village a
written petition to set up a citizens’ association. I
had also selected a day on which we would assemble in
the community hall, but I had not as yet affixed my sig-
nature. People racked their brains trying to figure out
who might have written this. I had never been involved
in community matters and had never run for office, so no
one thought of me. The gathering took place on a Sunday
afternoon; and at that time, I made a motion to pass part
of the demands for which I had previously made notes. Of
course the people then knew who had arranged all of this.
In a few instances I had told some people earlier, so
there were a few who did not attend. Unfortunately there
were some among them to whom we just could not explain
the need for an organization. The point of it was that
the citizens themselves should take community matters in-
to their own hands and have a voice in the solution, par-
ticularly when the mayor and several council members had
shown that they were not going to protect community in-
terests. On such occasions ideas are presented that are
outside of the realm of reason. Johann Konrad Bachman,
48

for example, said to me, "Well, Daehler, now we no longer
need to pay community taxes to Knoetz." Knoetz was our
community treasurer. Several members of the village coun-
cil joined the citizens' association at once. Soon a mo-
tion was passed to petition the governmental admistration
to hold mayoral elections. For this purpose the citizens
gave written authority, which was verified by the signa-
tures of about three-fourths of the villagers.

An organized association did not evolve, to be
sure; and since its purpose had really been a mayoral
election, the people let matters slide by giving me the
described authority. Our petition for a mayoral election
was forwarded to the proper authorities soon afterward;
and it did not remain without effect. A copy of my let-
ter was sent to the mayor for his explanation. The first
letter we received from the governmental administration
asked us to be patient until the present mayor's term had
expired. After urgent requests and energetic presentations
concerning our grievances, caused through negligence and
ill will by the mayor against his constituents, the im-
pression was made that lengthy waiting would do no good.
Three more petitions followed; and the day for a new elec-
tion was finally determined. Johannes, Lober won with 115
votes; Heinrich Schmidt and Johann Konrad Daehler each
received 83 votes. During the course of the election two
men, Kasper Sauer and Johannes Begoa, had behaved so badly
that both of them were put. in prison for a week. The sup-
porters of the mayor did not have a candidate, but all of
the votes they could gather were allotted to Johannes
Lober; this was quite acceptable to all of us since he was
better suited for the office than his brother-in-law,
Schmidt. As for myself, I did not want and could not have
accepted the office because of my business. Thus, the
right man had been elected. No run off election was
necessary; and several weeks later a document of confirma-
tion was sent to Johannes Lober.

The bureaucrat, Volp, was removed; and we now had
as mayor, Johannes Lober, a man of the people who was with-
out any intrigues or stupid pride. People liked this very
much. They could go into his office, unashamed of their
plebian manners, and talk things over with him in a natural
way. The matter regarding the dam boom he left alone be-
cause he neither had the courage to build a new dam nor had
the wish to become involved in legal proceedings. I reminded
him that one could place the dam boom below the bridge on
community property, but he did not think he dared to do that.
More than a year later an inspector from the district build-
ing department in Darmstadt was making a business trip to
Ulrichstein, and stayed over night in our village at Inn-
keeper Hauffman's. Mayor Lober used this opportunity and
told the former all about this state of affairs. It was his
49

expert opinion, too, to lay the dam boom on government prop-
erty; then the mill owner could protest this later if he
wanted to do so. Consequently, I was charged by the council
and the mayor to attend to the matter. I had the forester
show me the oak that the district forester had selected, and
arranged to have the timber picked up at a time when I
thought I would have the boom finished. It had two matching
parts. Before the widow of the miller, Johannes Jung, could
get a court injunction from the district court in Laubach,
the dam boom had been installed in the Seenbach. The widow
initiated court proceedings that were to last for years. I
do not know exactly how it was resolved. It is said that
she won the case but that she had left the mill closed and
it was falling apart. She was the kind of woman whose
children could not live with her so they left home.

It was in the year 1851 that residents of the city
of Laubach protested repeatedly the brick works of Count
Solms, which were operated on city property. Things went
so far that Count Otto decided to tear down the buildings,
and re-establish the brick works on a smaller scale on the
northwest side of town, where he had purchased several par-
cels of land. This undertaking soon got under way. During
this job I became seriously ill. The count's brickmaker
had bought of those buildings that were surplus, one that
had been used to dry brick. A journeyman and I were in the
process of modifying that building into a barn. One morning
as I worked on that job I felt an exceptional tiredness in
my legs. I bared them and noticed that red spots had ap-
peared. I instructed my journeyman, Johannes Rister, how to
proceed with the work and outlined what should be done; then
I told him I was ill, and went home. At this time I had
promised that I would build a roof over some vacant spot to
be used to cast a new bell for our church. I took Christian
Bachman along with me. One reason was as a matter of safety
because I was very weak. The other reason was to show him
in the forest, near the brick kiln road, some timber to use
for the roof. Then I walked with him to the construction
site and described what had to be done. Finally I arrived
home. No one was there. My wife had taken the cart and
had gone to work in the fields; and the children were in
school. At last our maid, Katharina Walter, came home. I
sent her directly to Laubach to get Dr. Steinmetz, and told
her she was not to return without the doctor. Three hours
went my before the doctor came. In the meantime my wife had
come home too.

By this time my body was already so swollen and
painful that my shirt and underwear had to be cut away to

get them off. I also began to feel an unbearable pain in
the intestines. It was all I could do to keep myself from
screaming out loud. I became so weak that I could not

turn over in bed without help. When I had to go to the
50

pot, it took two people to get me on it and get me back in
bed. For 27 days Dr. Steinmetz called on me at five in
the morning until the illness subsided. For weeks I lay
in bed with a temperature of 25 to 30 R. The doctor diag-
nosed it as cholera. During my illness I felt close to
death. I owed my recovery to the prudence, skill, and
diligence of the doctor as well as to the care of my wife,
who, however, collapsed from working so hard. She was so
over tired that ! feared she too would become ill. With
the help of our maid, she kept going.

My work at the count's castle yard was proceeding.
The count's building inspector, Loffler, supervised this.
Johannes Rister, together with brickmaker Alban, had the
barn finished. had started an addition to the residence
of District Forester Muller; Rister and his helper had fin-
ished that, with the help of Loffler. By that time I was
able at long last to return to work. I made my first little
jaunt into Laubach with Dr. Steinmetz in his buggy. He was
proud of his treatment and of my recovery. So another
period of suffering had been overcome; during which my wife,
nursing with care and upset with worry and sadness, had to
suffer much more than the patient himself.

In this troubled time nothing new was built except
for the building on the property of the count. In the city
of Laubach and in other communities there were, however, so
many minor jobs to be done that I could always keep my regu-
lar journeymen busy. The building department had given me
several repair jobs in Ulrichstein and in Selgenhof on be-
half of the Grand Duke of Darmstadt. For this I had to pro-
vide the lumber. There was also some pump work to do; and
I could not have done this without the drills of Count Solms.
I was never refused their use.

The count had a new storage building completed in
1853; it was constructed on the Utpher Hof in the Wetterau.
This building was constructed to be used for drying tobacco
leaves. To my advantage the carpentry was done not far
from my home in Freienseen in a forest of pine and fir, by
name Eichelgarten. In this year too, Innkeeper Schilling
wanted to have a barn built at the Hessenbrucke Hammer. He
had already built a smaller barn several years before, and
wanted to have this one directly joined to it. He consulted
me on this occasion as to how it would be best to construct
the: roof. I told him that if I were he, I would take the
old roof off, and put both barns under one roof, using a
double truss. Thereby he would gain considerable more space.
This seemed agreeable ‘to him; and he ordered the necessary
construction drawings to be made by the construction super-
visor and architect, Posainer. Since I was busy with work
for the count, the work was given to my uncle, Konrad
Daheler, who was very much delighted with this fine job.
51

In the winter of 1854 I received a letter from
Architect Posainer, who asked me to meet with him concern-
ing carpentry that I was to do. He was never at home ex-
cept on Sundays; hence I went to Grunberg on the following
Sunday and met with him in his home. He told me that he
had been charged by Mr. Luterous in Ruppertsburg to con-
struct a two story barn on the property of the latter. To
provide a building site, a barn had to be torn down. The
lumber was to come from the Ruppertsburg community forest.
If I were agreeable -- and he showed me an agreement he
had already drawn up -- to take over the job described in
the agreement, all I would have to do would be to sign. I
would also have to go to the forest to select the required
timber. I could see right away from the agreement that it
was a good deal. One thousand feet, according to Darmstadt
standards, were to be paid with two kreuzer in wages, old
coin. I did not hesitate long, and accepted the job. My
uncle, Konrad Daehler, had decided to leave for America;
and I would be able to keep his journeymen busy. He had
promised them employment, and I did not want them to be
without work. i

As soon as the weather permitted, I selected the
necessary oak trees in the forest and readied them by cut-
ting them square, the larger ones by cutting them open on
two sides, to be hauled home. For the construction of the
roof pine lumber was used. With the arrival of the lumber
at the construction site in Ruppertsburg am Beergarten the
job was begun and moved smoothly ahead. Posainer came once
a week, on occasion twice, to inspect our progress at the
construction site. On these occasions he had nothing to
say except that we had not worked fast enough. The same
thing was said at the site where the bricklayers were work-
ing. It had been decided to move the old barn. Since I
did not have enough wooden screws to move it to its new
destination, I borrowed some from the master carpenter,
Muller, in Queckboern. He received remuneration for this
service. I also obtained a set from Mr. Diehl, a master
carpenter in Ruppertsburg. In this way the task was
finished in June.

At the same time a few jobs were done for the
count. I had built, in addition to the earlier gypsum
mill, a simple saw mill according to the plans of the
count's building inspector, Loffler. Boards were to be
cut for this; and my journeyman, Christian Bachman, was
kept busy steadily. For the count there were also jobs
at the various farm buildings, horse stables, etc. In
other communities, several groups of journeymen were doing
the repair work, as for example in this year at HEinarts-
hausen. During the job in Ludernse, Architect Posainer
also gave me work for the Grand Duke. This soon was started
in the area of Ulrichstein on the road to Schotten, where a
52

new yard was to be made for the duke's stables. Work was
to begin with a barn and the stables.

At this time, however, the government had in the
village, Eichelsachen, a barn and a fruit storage building
that had become surplus; in addition there was another
building belonging to the forestry, consisting of an old
barn and a dwelling. All this, without the forester's
house, was to be used for the newly constructed barn on
the Neuen Selgenhof. This job too I took by agreement to
remove the old buildings as well as to do the carpentry
and remodelling, without having to buy new lumber. I was
to put up the building on the Selgenhof. The ground on
which the barn was to be erected was situated in such a
way that at the front on the east side entrances could be
made. On the west side was a low area suitable so that
in it the brick work for two horse stables could be built,
with entrance doors on the west side. In keeping with the
agreement, the lumber from the old buildings was not to be
reworked, even though it was crooked and a little bent.
This would save time. It did make it very difficult to
fit pieces of lumber together. Anyway, it was not a pleas-
ant task: old crooked lumber that was overly hard and heavy
necessitated all physical effort and caution to prevent
accidents in tearing down the old buildings and in putting
up the new.

So it came about that I developed a rather dim
view of Inspector Posainer. When we tore down the forestry
barn and the top beam was taken down, it measured 64 feet
long and 14 to 16 inches thick, and was square hewn oak. I
knew that this piece of lumber was to be cut into two beams
for the stables. He happened to be present, so I asked him
to permit me to cut the beam in two in its present position.
In that way there would be less danger for my workers. To
this, however, he would not agree; be it because of envy
toward me or because of his natural stupid official pride,

I know not. My requests had come to an end. I made prep-
aration, and instructed the journeymen they should pay atten-
tion to my orders-only. With the help of Providence no acci-
dent occurred. This fellow, Posainer, was used to accepting
bribes; I did this once and it caused me to incur some loss.
Had I satisfied this weakness of his more often, I might

have had more advantages. I always demanded merely justice
for myself wherever it was and asked for no special favors.
That made me come out on the short end, as was the case with
this building. By the time the barn was erected, it was al-
ready late fall. Martin Boning, who was in charge of the
bricklaying also finished his walls late. When my dear
Posainer came, after the barn was finished, he said, "Well,
53

this is junky, Daehler, here we have a threshold that is
really crooked. I want you to take it out and replace it
with one that is straight. And that lintel up there is
quite crooked; you could have put it in differently so
that the wall would be plumb." I was not obligated to do
these things for the sake of appearance. My agreement
stated that I was to use the lumber as it was without hew-
ing it straight. I was absolutely silent, and did it,
spending three or four hours work in the process. I did
not want to get into any argument over such a trifle; and
since I had already greased his palm, this was really no
loss to me.

This was my last significant job around my home
town. Now and then there were still a few jobs to be done
for the count, including the winter in which the hauling
of timber for the sawmill was done. On one such occasion,
Count Otto Solms appeared on the job location and asked me
why I wanted to go to America. I replied very simply that
I thought I could there take care of my family in a better
way. That he knew about my desire to leave can be explained
as follows: Several weeks earlier I had made him a written
offer to sell a parcel of land located in the forest dis-
trict at Krunseen and that measured about ten Darmstadter
morgen in area; saying that I intended to go to America.

He had his agent offer me 1,000 gulden, but I thought the
land to be worth much more so I sold it to N. N. Kraespal
in Laubach for 1,100 gulden. I was now busy preparing for
the departure to America, set for the spring of d855."; 1
had Mayor Lobler conduct a house and commodities auction
before Christmas, 1854. It is not necessary to say that I
was kept waiting a long time by the courts regarding the
completion of the sale documents. For that winter I had
more than enough to do for myself; this included building
crates. When I had adequately taken care of all my finan-
cial affairs, including the fare for ship passage of 58
florin per person, my cash on hand at the time of departure,
April 20th, when we said farewell to Freienseen, was around
2,300 or 2,400 gulden. I am no longer quite sure of the
amount.
54

EMIGRATION

On April 20, 1855,°in the evening, after sundown,
we took the first important and definite step for emigra-
tion from our dear homeland into a world known only from
hearsay. We did so with the greatest confidence in Provi-
dence, Who had manifested Himself repeatedly in the course
of my life as a Guardian Spirit of Protection; and I ac-
knowledge this gratefully. We; my son, Louis, who was 13,
my daughter, who was 11, and I; together with our relative,
Henry Benzel, age 14, went to Laubach, where we spent the
night at the Sose Inn, which was owned by Johann Seitz.
My wife and our son, Henry, age 16, left a week before to
visit relatives in Ginheim, near Frankfurt. On April 21st,
in the morning I called on Dr. Steinmetz one more time to
say good bye to him for good. Then we took the stage coach
to Friedberg; there we boarded the train that carried us to
Frankfurt. We arrived and proceeded to the homes of rela-
tives. The following week we went to Maintz. I entered
into an agreement with a neighbor, J. K. Hoffmann, a man
who hired out to do hauling, and with Christian Bachman,
who had to escort the load, to bring our luggage to Mainz.

We with our luggage were put on board a steamship
on the 23rd to begin the trip down the Rhine. At the dock
an already fairly large group of emigrants had gathered.
The trip down the Rhine went fairly well. At noon we stopped
at Cologne, and stayed over night in an inn in Rotterdam.
From there we sailed across the Channel to London; there was
great misery among the passengers due to sea sickness. The
Channel was turbulent; sea sickness struck without finding
much resistance; yet we all arrived well but very weakened
and lame in London.

Arriving at one of those travelers hotels, one
would have liked to lie down and get some sleep; but after
drinking a cup of coffee, we were driven like a herd of
sheep to the harbor where we had to board the sailing ship
that was to take us to New York. It happened to be low
tide, and we stumbled through the mud to reach a 16 foot
long ladder that was our means to climb aboard our ship,
where we spent the night. I no longer remember the name of
the ship. A great many necessities were still to be brought
aboard since, according to our travel contract, we were re-
ceiving only partial board. There were thus many things
that we still intended to buy for the voyage; e.g., potatoes,
eggs, hams, and straw filled mattresses. The partial board
that we were to get we learned consisted of tea, sugar,
zweiback, and drinking water. We were given so much of the
latter that we used it for cooking too. We had taken along
55

for housekeeping much foodstuff: zweiback, meat, wurst,
sauerkraut, peas, coffee, eggs, cheese, butter, condensed
milk, wine, and rum; in fact, we had so much that we did
not have to buy any of the stores delivered to the ship.
I did buy potatoes in London harbor. There were several
hundred passengers; perhaps three hundred of them were
German; the rest were Irish, French, Swiss, Italian, and
two Chinese men.

The first week the voyage went quite well; the
wind was always favorable. The second week it was alter-
nately stormy or calm. After having spent thirty days
aboard we sighted the coast of New York. It was the Mon-
day of Pentecost, and was becoming dark as our ship
entered New York harbor. We spent that night on board.
The captain of our ship, Braddish, was an American who
favored the Germans a great deal. We awarded him a cer-
tificate of appreciation for our good treatment. Next
morning, May 29th, we disembarked, went into New York
City, and took lodging in a guest house at 78 Greenwich
Street; our landlord was Joseph Strebel, a German from
Worms. Our luggage, for which I had paid transportation
from London to Albany, was loaded onto a boat and brought
to a railroad depot along the Hudson River. The guest
house in which we had stayed was so over crowded that not
everyone had a place to sleep. The innkeeper showed him-
self quite intelligent on this occasion; he gave several
kegs of beer to the young men so that they drank and sang
all night. Unfortunately we who had beds could not get
any sleep either.

With this my life in Europe is ended. The con-
tinuation will be of my experiences in America.

NOTE: Research notes left by Albert H. Daehler state
that the name of the vessel was the ASHBURTON. She was
an American vessel, registered at about 1,020 tons; and
carried 446 passengers. Also on board was cargo con-
signed to C. Grinnell.
56

EXPERIENCES IN AMERICA
e
* The railroad trip from New..York to Chicago was
25 gulden per person. Christian Lutz, Georg Boning, Louis
Streunagel, and others had emigrated with their families
to America in 1852. Henry Berger, with his family, and
Konrad Scheuermann, who was Single, had emigrated in 1845.

Having arrived in New York on May 29, 1855, we
spent the night there. On the 30th we went by rail to
Albany, where we arrived on the morning of the 3lst.

There were many people living in Albany who had emigrated
from Freienseen in 1846, among them were my father's sis-
ter, Maria Elisa, and her husband, Peter Bachmann, as well
as my former journeyman, Johannes Rister and his family.

I had the latter's address. Consequently I decided that
we would stay in Albany a few days to get some rest and to
get cleaned up.

After we, together with our luggage, had been
ferried across the Hudson, we stopped on the other shore
in front of an inn, where we heard German spoken. . We
stayed there. After I made further inquiry, it turned out
that the innkeepers were the brothers Kreuter from Grunberg.
In Germany they had been suspected of swindling all that
they could lay their hands on from immigrants, therefore, I
did not want to stay with them any longer. When my family
and I were ready to leave, we were trailed by a group of
about 50 other immigrants. They asked me if I would take
some of them into the inn, which I did. We had breakfast
there. I left our luggage with my family, and went to look
for the home of Johannes Rister. I found only his wife and
children home. He had gone to Illinois to see if he could
find a place for them to settle in Carroll County, where
they had friends. I soon located my aunt. We rented a
small house in their neighborhood; as we had good accomoda-
tions we stayed there for a few days. My aunt went to a
bit of trouble for us. She arranged for transportation for
us. We were picked up at the river and were taken to her
home, where she gave a hand in helping us get organized.
She also gave us the opportunity to do our laundry, helping
with that as best she could.

All in all, we were treated well and in a most
friendly manner by our old friends: Johannes Moll, Pfarres
Hannes, Henry Nonnenmacher, and N. N. Eckstein from
Laudenbach.

I, however, intended to go to Chicago, where my
sister and her husband, Christian Lutz, with their family,
had been living for two years. It was my intention to farm
in the area west of that city. We left for the west by
train on Sunday, June 4th. In this matter Konrad Michel, a
son-in-law of Johannes Rister, helped us a great deal.
Christian Bachman and Henry Berzel, for whom I paid the
travel expenses, went with us. The trip at Niagara Falls,
across the suspension bridge, was very slow; and we had to
make do with improvised cattle cars, in which we could not
even sit up properly. On frosty nights our teeth sometimes
chattered. In this way we arrived on Friday, June 8th, in
the city of Chicago, weary and tired. As it was already
late in the afternoon, we found accommodations at the
Schweitzer Heimat, a small guest house. Here I inquired
about our relatives and friends, but we found no one who
had ever heard of either George Boning or Christian Lutz.

Anyway, no one knew anything about the Germans
known to me, even though I had many acquaintances in town
who had been living there for eight or nine years. I did
know that many of them peddled lettuce and other vegeta-
bles in the city. The next morning I said to myself, "To-
day you are going to find them." After breakfast, I went
outside, and walked down the street toward the bridge.
Suddenly, as I came back from the bridge, there stood in
front of me a girl holding a small basket filled with let-
tuce. I recognized her at once as the daughter of Louis
Streunagel, who had lived in our village. I asked her
how much she charged for her lettuce, paid her the amount,
and asked her to follow me. I told her who I was, but I
think she had recognized me already. I told her that we
had arrived the night before, and asked her to come to
the place where we were staying. I would not let her go
until she had told us where Christian Lutz or George

Boning, or Konrad Daehler were living. "Oh, well," she
replied, "we people from Freienseen live on the north
side, not far apart from one another." So much the bet-

ter! I soon arranged through the innkeeper for transpor-
tation; and we moved our things to the home of my brother-
in-law, Christian Lutz, on Clyburn Avenue. He worked in a
cannery. He and his family were not living in that house
but lived in another one near the cannery. Thus we were
able to move into his other house and live there. Our
next door neighbor happened to be my uncle and godfather,
Konrad Daehler. A turner, Christian Meyer, had added to
my uncle's home a workshop, where he did carpentry and
made tables, beds, and chairs. Meyer had several cabinet
maker journeymen; and he also gave Christian Bachman work
for some time.

Next I had to arrange for Henry Benzel's trip to
St. Louis. Henry Weisel, a butcher, who was the boy's .
uncle and godfather, lived there. The latter had promised
to pay the travel expenses for the boy to St. Louis. I,
however, had paid expenses to Chicago. I now wished reim-
bursement; consequently, I prepared a bill for Henry
Weisel, requesting payment of the 100 florin and 41 kreuzer
58

that I had advanced. Young Benzel had received 6 florin
and 20 kreuzer from his father when we departed from
Freienseen. Benzel's brother, Johannes, and a sister,
Elizabeth, who had been living in Chicago for two years,
took him in; and his brother even escorted him to St.
Louis, bringing back for me from H. Weisel the money I
had advanced.

The small house owned by my brother-in-law that
we had moved into was adeauate for a time as temporary
quarters. It was not suited for a longer period of time
as it had no kitchen. We had to put our stove outside;
and that, be it in sunshine or rainy weather, proved a
nuisance for the housewife who cooked. For the time be-
ing we visited all our people from Freienseen. First we
called on our friend, George Boning; and he did a great
many things for us. For his business as a brick layer
and plasterer, he had to have a one horse cart. This
turned out fine for us. When we bought a stove, he
brought it home for us in his cart. He also hauled some
boards from a lumber yard for me. I used those to make
beds, a table, and some benches. We needed some furni-
ture as the house we lived in was empty. With these
things I could arrange it so that we could enjoy some
comfort for’the time being. During this time my wife
and I decided that we did not care for city life. We
wanted to have a more comfortable home of our own; and
as I mentioned before, we had in mind a farm. We soon
made up our minds not to stay to Chicago much longer.

I had also bought a gun for a young man, Otto
Immelt, who came from our village. He was working in
Kankakee County for a farmer, a Yankee; and I wrote to
him about this. The latter came to get the gun, and
stayed with us for a few days. When he left, I went
with him to look over the area and see if I should like
it and find out if it were possible to buy land there.
However, I did not like it. The land was too flat and
swampy; everywhere was much water in the lowlands. It
seemed to me unhealthy; perhaps even more prone to fever
than Chicago. My sister and all her children had come
down with fever. In Chicago I noticed that many adults
warded off the fever by drinking brandy as the drinking
water, which could be found at only an eight to ten
foot depth, was very bad and had to be responsible for
inducing the fever.

The strange way of life in the big city
hurriedly drove me to try to find a more suitable place
for us. Because Henry Zugschwerdt had already highly
praised his home in the area of Carroll County, I in-
tended to look over that area too. Many people from
the old homeland were supposed to have settled there and
in the surrounding counties. The first thing I did now
was to make plans to pay a visit to Henry Zugschwerdt in
Carroll Co. He had given his address to George Boning
when he had returned to Germany for a visit and had called
on Boning. George Boning now decided that he would go
along with me, and visit his old friends in that area.

I liked this idea very much, so one fine morning
we took the Illinois Central to Freeport, and went the
rest of the way by stage coach, arriving at night. Boning
knew that a shoemaker, Balzer Schreiner, a German from
Vogelsberg, lived in Mt. Carroll. We looked the latter up;
and he showed us an inn, where we stayed that night. Next
morning, after breakfast, Schreiner returned. Since it was
Sunday, he did not waste any time, but took us for a walk
through town. He showed us the way to Black Oak Grove,
where Henry Zugschwerdt was living. After much inquiry we
found him living in a log house. Here we remained for a
couple of days, and looked over the land in the neighbor-
hood that was being offered for sale.

Speculators had by this time already bought up
every bit of federal land; and thusly, they were the
sellers. In the area, particularly in the woods, several
German families had settled. In a straight southerly di-
rection and across from Franz Hinkel and Henry Zugschwerdt,
was an eighty acre tract that belonged to George M. Schneider,
a German who was single, and who was offering the land for
sale again. This area I liked, partly because of the neigh-
bors whom I knew. As Schneider was at that time in Mt.
Morris, he had to be notified that a prospective buyer was
here. George Boning wished to visit a friend, Johannes
Muller, in Elkhorn; at any rate, we went down there one day.
Zugschwerdt went along and actually showed us the way. The
first acquaintance we met was Johannes Rister. He had helped
to build a house for Peter Schreiner. Boning went to Muller's;
and Rister took me to the home of George Henry Schreiner,
where we had lunch. The latter was probably footing the bill
for the construction of the home of his son, Peter. Here I
found old friends from Sellenrod and the Schmidts; that is
to say, Johannes Muller, blacksmith Hancort Rahn, Mrs. Rucke
with her sons and daughters. Peter Muller, and the old
Schmidt Hannes with his whole family. From here I sent a
message to George M. Schneider through John Peter, whom I
paid five dollars for this service, asking that he come on
a certain day to Black Oak Grove to finalize the sale of his
land. I believe that it was on the 5th or 6th of July that
we got together at Henry Zugschwerdt's place; and I bought
our present.place of eighty acres from G. M. Schnedier,
whereby we agreed to register the deed in Mt. Carroll on the
60

16th of the month. For this Schneider brought along his
father-in-law from Mt. Morris. The sale price was $460.00,
cash.

Since Zugschwerdt had offered that I could stay at
his place and bring my family there with me, I returned to
Chicago, leaving on Saturday, July 7th. I had hoped to
arrive there during the evening to spend Sunday there, and
then on Monday morning to move lock, stock, and barrel for
Black Oak. My plans came to nought. In those days one had
to go from Mt. Carroll by stage coach and then transfer to
a train at Freeport. I arrived in Mt. Carroll too late to
catch the stage coach. It was between eleven and twelve A.M.
when I started to walk to Freeport; I arrived there at eight
P.M. Hoping that I still would be able to surprise my family
that same night, I went to the depot. I was told that it was
Sunday and that there would be no train. I had to wait until
the next evening. What could I do? There was no other way
other than to accept fate and wait. I went to the inn where
I had stayed once before and spent the night there. I waited
all this time with great impatience. The next day was the
longest Sunday that I have ever experienced. At nine P.M. I
boarded the train to Chicago, and arrived there the next
morning about four o'clock. Very quickly everything neces-
sary was packed. Boning was most helpful; he took all of
our household belongings, the stove and accessories, the two
beds made from cottonwood, a table, a bench to sit on, and
several other things, to the depot in his wagon. We departed
from Chicago on July 9th. . By evening we were in Freeport,
where we stayed overnight. Much to my good fortune, I found
someone who took our things to Black Oak for eleven dollars.
The following morning the household goods and the crates
were loaded; and we went to Black Oak, where we arrived at
Henry Zugschwerdt's place in the evening.

Here we took up residence, living in the same log
house in which he too was. living. We slept in the attic;
our kitchen was outside; we ate in the living room. At the
appointed time G. M. Schneider came from Mt. Morris; and we
went to Mt. Carroll, where Esquire Harris drew up the sales
agreement. At that time I paid Schneider.

Now there was much work. We had to build, but we
also had to grub as it had been definitely determined that
we were going to farm. Christian Bachman followed us, and
spent a whole year with us. We first went to the west side
of our new property to grub and to clear seven and one-quar-
teracres that Henry Zugschwerdt plowed in August with his
breaking plow. I paid him twenty dollars for that.
61

When we started to build, using the German way or
better yet, the Vogelsberg way, two stories so that we
would save on roof construction. It was difficult to get
lumber and shingles. We still had some fairly aged oak’
logs. We began to hew them in square shape and to cut them
into six inch timbers. The size of our building would have
to depend on the amount of lumber we were able to find. It
turned out that the building was to measure 24 feet long by
13 feet wide. We three, our son, Henry, Christian Bachman,
and I were long busy at this job for we had to do our own
calking and chinking. There was no bricklaying as it was
impossible to get any bricks. We spent almost two months
doing the carpentry; it was the end of October before every-
thing was done. A cellar was provided, but the house was
set on oaken blocks. The windows I obtained from a sawmill
company in Mt. Carroll; the lumber I got from Arvin, from
whom Fritz Queckboerner had bought his land earlier, and who
had built himself a shanty. From these I made roofing lum-
ber and did the carpentry as long as the materials lasted.
Roof shingles we got from the mill in Mt. Carroll.

This time was one of the worst in my whole life
because my wife as well as our son, Louis, came down with
the ague. They were lying in the Zugschwerdt beds, or
rather I should say, in the attic on sacks stuffed with
straw. My wife was deathly ill. Daughter Wilhelmina
cared for her; and John Hochstetter, who lived in Mt.
Carroll, was our doctor. Louis was not as seriously ill,
but his eyes were infected again; and that frightened me.
Those were hard days while we were building. I always
kept my eyes on the path that ran from our construction
site to the Zugschwerdt log house. Any moment I thought
I would see someone come to bring me terrible news.
Providence was merciful; and with time things turned for
the better. The fever did not leave my wife completely
until May or June of the next year, 1856. In the late
fall of 1855 Jacob Hartman took pity on us, and covered
the walls with mortar made of straw and clay. Jacob
Hartman was a bricklayer from Golzenheim, who had come
across the ocean several weeks after us. He arrived in
Black Oak at approximately the same time and was living
in a log house with K. Hild. The weather was good for
fall; and the mortar walls dried out well. We moved
into the house on the 9th of November. Even the chimney
had been constructed out of mortar with a board covering.
We were happy to be in our new home even though it was
in a sort of raw stage. For the winter it had to do.

We had plenty of wood for heating purposes; in fact,. it
had to be used to get it out of the way.
62

To return to the subject of Johannes Rister. -He,
himself, worked in Elkhorn with his Vogelsberg acquaintances.
His family had remained in Albany, N. Y. In the late summer '
he brought them to Elkhorn, and they lived with Franz Hinkel,
who was single at that time. Rister became a pious and re-
ligious man as he had associated himself with the Brethren
at Elkhorn. To demonstrate this, he sold me a cow for $30.00
cash. I took the cow home and tried to milk her but found
that was quite impossible because she kicked like the worst
kind of horse. He tried to make me believe that his niece,
the wife of Konrad Peter, had milked the cow for some time.

I bought from the senior Henry Zugschwerdt a pair of old
oxen and a still older wagon, so that we could enjoy a few
rides. Both items cost me $110.00. In checking into this,
I did find out, but too late, that he had overcharged me
approximately $40.00. Well, I thought, there is nothing

I can do about this now.

We had moved into our winter quarters and now had
to think about groceries for the months ahead. I got wheat
from Werner Zugschwerdt in exchange for building him a new
house. I also bought a hog, slaughtered, from Hamilton
Sterns for six cents a pound. We had for the winter enough
potatoes that we had acquired by working a potato field
belonging to N. N. Conn. The meat did not last us through
the winter so we had to buy more. We bought a quarter of
an ox from the elder Zugschwerdt. The money we had brought
with us from Germany now started to run short, and we had
to think about earning some more. We had approximately
700 to 800 dollars left, when we moved to Black Oak. The
boys had made some money in the summer working in the
threshing mills. In the fall they helped farmers with the
harvest. We built the aforementioned log house for Werner
Zugschwerdt the first winter. Luckily that first winter
was not too severe. Furthermore, we built several new
wooden sleds. Farmers brought us the wood that we cut and
used to make the sleds. The first sled we built for our-
selves; the second was built for N. N. Goldern, who paid
$5.00 for it:

So passed the first winter in our new homeland.
Together with other residents of Black Oak like Anton
Hinkel, the brothers Sylvester and George Wagner, and Karl
Geldmacher, we took the first steps to become citizens.
Spring wheat had to be sown on the seven and one-half
acres of ploughed land. I purchased the seed from our
neighbor, Dr. Stephenson, 15 bushels of it at $1.25 a bu-
shel. We also cleared and grubbed an additional ten acres
that were planted in June. Neighbor Hinkel had a piece of
land that he wanted plowed, so we went together and bought
a small plow. Each of us had a few oxen; and then we
started. The first crop on those 74 acres was very bad.
Weeds and brush had not yet decayed; we had plowed much
63

too late. We only got 374 bushels of wheat. The stand of
wheat had not been tall. enough. Dr. Stephenson cut the
wheat with his reaper, for which we helped him by tying his
bundles. We had barely enough bread for now, but not for
the entire year. So, again we had to buy wheat for seeding
for the next year, 1857. This we bought from Adam Daggert.

I had allotted to Johannes Rister a piece of land
on the east side of our property, at his request. He was
obliged to clear it for use for three years; and I was to
attend to the fencing. There was not enough lumber to be
used for that, so we had to find something to use in its
place. We had provided fence posts enough, during the win-
ter, to fence three sides of a forty acre tract. The rest,
however, was lacking. I had seen, at Dr. Stephenson's, a
wire fence placed. I thought it best that I also buy wire,
but I did not have the money. Adam Daggert loaned me $100
at 15%; and I went to Chicago and bought enough to put up
a three wire fence. This fence did not do the job; the
cattle kept breaking through; and the oxen which in those
days roamed free at night, tore down the wire.

Franz Hinkel wanted at this time to be rid of the
Rister family. The latter, who had even less money than I,
had no choice but to build a home. He came to me; and
hauled onto the piece of land he was working, with my oxen,
some oak logs. These he cut into timbers of from five to
six inches as well as making necessary lumber for the roof,
and the flooring. He did not have any shingles. His build-
ing site was the southest corner of our land, where he re-
mained for three years. In the meantime, his daughter, Anna
Elisa, and her husband, K. Michel, had also arrived here;
and they lived with them. Michel stayed’ one more year at
this place. Rister bought 80 acres west of our property;
and thus became our neighbor. He built a home and stables
near the road.

The winter of 1856-1857 was one of the worst I have
ever seen. From beginning to end there was lots of snow, on
top of which there was an icy crust of about three inches.

If one needed fire wood and wanted to get it with the oxen,
it took only three or four steps over the snow before all
broke through and could not go any farther. As the cattle
had no other protection than the piles of straw, and what

was worse, did not get much feed, many of them died. Thomas
Meier, for example, lost forty head. We lost both of our
cows, each of which had cost thirty dollars. We did have a
log-type barn for them and also slough hay, but there was no
bedding straw as that was scarce this cold winter. Our oxen
roamed the neighboring fields where they found corn stalks.
We, ourselves, had not grown any corn. Because of our finan-
cial situation we were not able to buy any. Yet when we used
the oxen to work, we had to buy corn. Later we bought another
64

cow from Johannes Rister. I think it cost $32; and it was
a good animal. The boys and I also built a house for Henry
Traum, who paid us with a cow. That was in 1857.

Now and then we earned a little, as for example,
when we put a new roof on Franz Hinkel's log house or a
shed, for which several timbers had to be split because
they were too thick. That was in October, 1855. In the
spring of 1856 we did some building for Adam Daggert. Also
in the summer of 1856 we built for Werner Zugschwerdt the
log house into which he and his brother, Henry, and Anton
Hinkel, all three unmarried men, moved. Through the year
we manged to get along, rather poorly, with cash earnings.
One did not get to see much cash. People traded or ex-
changed mutually, work for goods and vice versa.

In the spring of 1857 Konrad Horst and his family
arrived from Wohnfeld. They lived with us for several
months, and then bought 40 acres southwest of Albrechts
church. He felled several oaks at a place where our son,
Henry, built him a little house, German style, from the
limbs. He provided the beam construction himself. In
Germany Horst had been a bricklayer. On the northeast cor-
ner of this lot Horst's aged father was buried. In 1856,
during July and August, we built for Henry Geisz a house
from oak timber that had been logged on his land. In between
times we worked at harvesting as long as it lasted. In Novem-
ber, 1857, we built a new home for Konrad Rahn, a blacksmith
in Elkhorn; we used forest timber. The home was for his
tenants, Lust, basket weavers from Sellenrod; we were given
a cow in payment. For the elder Henry Zugschwerdt we also
built a new log house, for which we cut the timber.

It was in that year, 1857, in November, that Philip
Lang emigrated. He joined us and stayed with our family
during that winter. They remained through the spring, when
Lang and Kaspar Wagner from Einartshausen rented land from
Werner Zugschwerdt. They built themselves their residence
right there. For that purpose Lang had bought a few young
oxen from N. N. Bentschick. In that year I bought a few
oxen from N. N. Snow. They had been used by a man named
Dickenson, who had worked for Snow. The latter was not
present personally as he lived in Ohio. Dickenson plowed
the 80 acre tract of land on Snow's behalf. This was lo-
cated near the Fair Haven school house and was purchased in
the 1860's by Konrad Sack. The oxen cost about 80 dollars.
I can not remember the exact amount as they were not yet
half paid for. Snow, in addition, owned a piece of forest
land, of which eighty acres were to be fenced. Dickenson
asked me for rails and posts, which were to be made on lo-
cation. After that I was supposed to fence in the area.
I promised that the boys and I would attend to the matter.
65

I intended to pay for the oxen in this manner. I must have
worked off fifty dollars of the debt this way when there
was a rumor that Dickenson had disappeared suddenly. At
this my heart fell, like into my shoes. Shortly afterward,
Snow appeared on the scene. When I wanted to pay for the
oxen through my work on the fence, he turned me down, say-
ing that he too had lost a great deal through Dickenson.

He said that he could not get any thing from Dickenson and
would have to take over that 80 acre tract of land at a
loss if he were not to lose everything. So, what could I
do? Snow deferred payment until I could pay, but of course
not without interest. T went sadly on my way. For me that
was a costly experience.

At the beginning of the winter of 1858, Philip
Lang bought forty acres from Snow. The land bordered our
property on the east side and was a part of the school
land. He paid eight dollars an acre. On this he wanted
to build a house and live there himself. He did not have
any money other than the $30 his father had sent him from
Germany in March. We neighbors got Lang to take us to
Savanna one day; and for that $30 we bought boards, two by
fours, shingles, and windows, as much of these items as we
could get for the money that we had. Thresholds and the
thicker lumber my boys and I cut from oak trunks. We built
from all this a little house, 14 feet by 16 feet. I pro-
vided my own food during the building, but later on re-
ceived $5.00 wages. I had promised to build the house; and
I kept my word even though. he turned out not to be my friend
and called me incredible names. At one time I had given
Lang about ten bushels of potatoes aS a gift. When he used
them up he wanted more, put I could not let him have any
more. I had taken several sacks full of them to Mt. Carroll
to a store to pay a debt, the groceries that I had used
during the winter. He became furious with me! He told
about me all kinds of things; none of which were true.
Still, I finished his house for him so that he could live
there. Later we became friends once more. In years there-
after this pattern repeated itself frequently when not
every thing went according to his wishes.

In April, 1858, Henry Hoffman came from Freienseen
with his wife and seven year old son; they stayed with us
during the summer. He had already spent a year in Blue Is-
land, I1l., where he contracted a fever and had great diffi-
culty getting cured. Two weeks after the arrival of Hoffman,
N. N. Bissel arrived with his family. They had been sent to
us by my brother-in-law, Christian Lutz, from Chicago. Thus
we had two other families to room and board. The latter
family, however, l kept for only three weeks. I made a bed
for them from oak limbs and found a log house for them to
rent in Burr Oak. To Hoffman I gave some land and some seed
potatoes that he cultivated that summer. He had a good crop.
When the harves*
across the road

square. I ask:
him I could bu
replied. I to

roof and walls
of building ma
ing prairie an
12 x 14. It w
but I could co
Since the hous
suggested to fF
have your wife
you can put it
Hoffman, as we
he could make
they would. I
land, on which
four years. H
home. In thos
ing ours, livi
Rister, who in
Konrad Michel,
Bast. Bast liv
and was a blac!
x 16, from lum)
purpose,

Previ:
schwerdt. Whi
On June 6, 1855
and buildings
in which Bast a
were competely
if I would pern
had rented an a
buildings. He
that day he die
bought from his
for my son, Hen

Elisa, born Zug

their daughter,

The storm of June 6,
that the top hal?
say the part above
blown away along

from Franz Hinkel.

{ him a small house.

‘ials.
‘athered enough oak timber to make a house,

66

was over, I dug a cellar for him right
It measured ten feet
him how much money he had left, and told
He had only $13, he
him that that would cover the cost of a
We went to Savanna and bought $13 worth
Then we went out to the neighbor-

enclosed all around with rough boards,
only about half the roof with Shingles.
as the usual post and beam German way, I
"If you want to live in a warm place,
1 her spare time, make the mortar and
the walls yourself." Incidentally,
1 too, had to try and find work so that’
2 money. Things went on as I thought
ated to him one and one-half acres of
and his family must have remained for
daughter, Maria, was born in that little
LyS there were three families, not count-
‘n our land: Henry Hoffman's; Johannes
‘ition to his family had his son-in-law,
‘ his wife living with them; and John
along the road of our northest corner
th. I had also built him a house, 14
he had purchased in Savanna for that

‘y Bast had lived with the elder Zug-
here he also had a blacksmith shop.
. tornado struck and blew down trees
‘lack Oak. Zugschwerdt's log house,
his wife lived, as well as the smithy
lished. Consequently, he asked me
him to live on our land, on which he
» until he could construct some new
ed there until May 20, 1862; at noon
‘f consumption. The following year I
dow the buildings and blacksmith tools
Henry lived there with his wife,
owerdt, who died in giving birth to
Lisa, in March, 1865.

1858, had been so terrible
of Zugschwerdt's log house, that is to
the first story, with the roof, was

with all the household goods inside.

Crates with clothing in them were found one and a quarter

miles away.

The roof and the upper story were ten rods

away from the house that was still Standing. I had just
built for Joost from rough timber on his land the house
that is now, in 1886, owned by Adam Kohler. It was

finished on Saturday and he was planning to move in on
67

Monday. On that same morning everything had been blown
away by the storm of: the day before. We found the shredded
and torn apart pieces scattered over a wide area. Karl
Geldmacher lived in a house made from boards. This was
toppled and blown about by the storm while he and his
family were still inside. As a result he was injured,
breaking his collar bone and being paralyzed for over a
year. These details are only examples.

I will now tell something about the Germans
living within a distance of three or four miles of our
neighborhood. Some of them we had met when we arrived
here; and many of them were people from Darmstadt in
Upper Hesse. Henry Zugschwerdt had a family composed of
two sons, Werner and Henry Jr., and three daughters, the
eldest of whom was married. Next door to his farm was
Franz Hinkel, a West Prussian, in those days still single,
on his farm. Those two were our next door neighbors. Two
miles away from us was Konrad Geisz and his family on a 40
acre tract of land that was still forested. Three quarter
miles to the west lived Konrad Hild and his half-brother,
Johannes Dietz, and their families. All three families
were from Ermenrod. Five miles northwest lived Adam
Daggert with his family as well as the widow Klein, who
lived not far from Dietz, with her family and her single
half-brother, Henry Weitzen. The latter and Daggert came
from around Alsfeld. Not far from Hild, Karl Schreiner
had located; he had come from Feldkrucke. N. N. Joost
from Ulrichstein and the aforementioned Jacob Hartman from
Golzenheim lived near Konrad Keil from Feldkrucke and
Ferdinand Ruppel, who came from near Alsfeld. Two miles
southwest lived his half-brother, Eberhard Pflug. Two
miles to the south were Konrad Seim from Sellenrod;

Konrad Friedrich, who was single; Johannes Friedrich, with
his wife, born Eckhard; and Henry Diehl, all from Rupperts-
burg. Diehl had a family; his wife was a daughter of the
elder Henry Zugschwerdt, who had made already seven trips
by sea. These people from Ruppertsburg all had crossed the
ocean with Zugschwerdt at one time or another. He had
brought them to this area because he had settled here
earlier; consequently, they had come here before us.

Christian Bachman had come here with us, and had
lived with us for one year. Philip Lang had also come with
us across the sea, but had gone first to Pittsburgh as a
locksmith. There he had been unable to support his family;
through our correspondence, he came here. Lang's home in
Germany had been Babenhausen. When we had been here a few
days Karl Geldmacher came with his family, accompanied by
his brother-in-law, Fritz Queckboerner, who also had his
family with him. They came here from New York, where they
had been tailors; and settled three miles west of us. A
68

brother of the latter, Phillip Queckboerner, a native of
Atzenheim and single, had come with us across the ocean
and had made his home close to us, a little to the south.
A number of people had come from Wurttemburg; among them
were the two brothers, Sylvester and George Wagner, and
A. A. Haag, who had settled in the area. These are the
Germans we met, with the exception of the Pennsylvania
Germans, who lived a little further south. They still
live in Fair Haven Township. Hild, Daggert, and Schreiner
live in Salem Township, where later on settled people who
had come from Vogelsberg, Einartshausen, and the villages
of Grunberg, Waiterschein, etc. Also Merbodt from the
Schmitte as well as some Prussians settled in that area.
In 1856 Henry Geisz and Johannes Eisfeller came with
their families from Ermenrod and settled at Black Oak.
Philip Birkenstock had come without his family; however,
he was able to provide them a home, so after two years
they came from Wohnfeld.

As concerns the native Yankees, they avoided
clearing the woodlands, so only two or three of them
became our neighbors. Anyway the Yankees are not very
numerous in our township; those who came settled on the
prairies. Several Pennsylvania German families were then
and are now living in our township. These Pennsylvanians,
whose ancestors came during the War for Independence, in
part from Hesse, in part from Wurttemburg, are peculiar
in that they still hold today German language and custom.
The language is mostly Wurttemburger in dialect. In many
counties in Pennsylvania, for example, in the City. of
Reading in Berks County, German was still spoken in the
public schools in the 1850's. In Mt. Carroll Seminary
there was from 1858 until 1861 a professor, Paul Lorenzen,
born in Holstein, who taught literature and geology. Com-
ing from an old clerical family, he had held a ministry
himself, but in 1844, because of his ideas, he brought his
free thinking family, father, brothers, and sisters to
Davenport, Iowa. Our Paul later went to Pennsylvania and
married a widow in Reading. After that he returned, going
to Mt. Carroll as a professor. He came to preach to us at
Black Oak every two weeks on Sunday, beginning in 1859.
With this I must mention that although his wife was a
native American, she could not speak English, only German.

For the German settler one of the first things
was to get himself a home, even if he did not have any
cash. Since the land had been bought by speculators, they
were able to make huge profit. These Germans were what
these speculators with land and a desire to make money
were looking for. Hence they sold 40 acres to one, 80
acres to another, according to the buyer's wishes, at ten
to twelve dollars an acre at the rate of ten to fifteen
69

per cent interest. Our Germans were, however, good workers.
In clearing the land and in farming, they could usually by
the time they had been here the second year raise a crop of
wheat. They-.did need another source of income to make ends
meet until then. Also they had to pay for the first plowing
of the grubbed land; this was done by a man who had a large
plow and a team of oxen and had made this work his business.
He charged three or four dollars to plow an acre of land.

In the end diligence won out. In clearing away the brush,
the immigrants helped one another mutually; for depending
on whether the brush was tall or short, there was a charge
of from three to ten dollars to clear an acre. There was
also a difference depending on whether the ground were flat,
rocky, or swampy. On those occasions the skill that I had
learned in Germany as a surveyor and had brought with me to
my new homeland came again into respect and use. I surveyed
the cleared and plowed properties for those interested in
having this done; it served to protect them from litigation.
I received a small remuneration for this. Whoever did not
have the funds to pay, and there were very few who did,
worked for me in return.

NOTE: Here abruptly ends the narrative. Why did
Johann Konrad Daehler stop? What interrupted him? We can
only speculate, but we can say, with Albert H. Daehler,
that he had written as he had built -- well!

Louis A. Daehler

TABLE OF APPROXIMATE EQUIVALENTS FOR MEASUREMENTS USED
IN THE TEXT

cord = a stack of wood 4 ft. high by 4 ft. wide by
8 ft. long

florin = 1 dollar and 60 cents

gulden = 48 cents

heller = 1/8 cent

kreuzer = % cent

lothen = 1/3 ounce

morgen = ,63]1 acres

ohm = 40 gallons

Yu = reamur; 30 r. = 103 degrees

simmer = 9/10 bushels
Lt.

II.

70

NOTES ON THE DAHLER ANCESTRY

JOHANNES DAHLER served in the Austrian army, and then
was in the Hessian governmental administrative service
at Dieburg.

ANNA MARIA (DAHLER) SCHNAUFER was the widow of a dis-
trict forest ranger. She received a pension and lived
with her family on a large farm near Eifelsdorf.

JACOB DAHLER was born 3 Oct., 1752, near Wohnbach,
Wetterau, Hesse; and died 5 Nov., 1831, at Freienseen,
Hesse-Darmstadt. During the 1770's he saw military
service in Holland and in the East Indies. Afterward
he became a master carpenter. In the latter capacity
he removed to Freienseen to assist in the building of
a new church. There he married Anna Margretha Stein,
who was born in Freienseen, 4 Sept., 1757; and died
there, 4 April, 1828.

PHILLIPINA DAHLER married in 1806 a man named HUBER,
who served as a soldier in Napoleon's army. She went
with him to Italy. Later they returned to Germany.
Her husband managed a dry goods and tailor shop in
Strassburg.

MARIA ELISA DAHLER married PETER BACHMANN. They came
to the United States in 1846 and settled near Albany,
New York. ,

ANNA MARIA DAHLER married KONRAD SCHMIDT, who operated
a bleaching, cotton weaving, and laundry business in
or near Freienseen.

ANNA MARGRETHA DAHLER.

KONRAD DAHLER was a master carpenter in Freienseen.

In 1854 he and his wife, whose maiden name was Boning,
came with their family to the United States and
settled in Chicago, Illinois. He died there ca. 1870.

MARIA ELIZABETH DAHLER.

JOHANN KURT DAHLER was born in Freienseen, 29 June,
1788; and died there, 17 Dec., 1848. His trade was
that of a master carpenter. His wife, whose maiden
name was ANNA MARGRETHA BENZEL, was born in Freien-
seen, 24 Feb., 1791; and died there, 1 Nov. 1838.
Her father, Johann Heinrich Benzel (born 15 Feb.,
1754; died 23 March, 1828), was a tailor in Freien-
seen. Her mother was Anna Margretha (Bober) Benzel
(born 11 Dec., 1757; died 26 Jan., 1814).

1. JOHANN KONRAD DAHLER, born in Freienseen, 6 Feb., 1811.
71

bo

JOHANNES DAHLER, born in Freienseen, 6 Oct., 1817,
died when nine months old.

3. KATHARINA DAHLER, born in Freienseen, 6 Oct., 1817,
was married in 1838 to CHRISTIAN LUTZ. They came to
the United States and resided in Chicago, Illinois.

a. CHARLES LUTZ
b. GOTTLIEB LUTZ
c, LOUISA (LUTZ) KORETKE

d. MARIA (LUTZ) STUHL

JOHANN HEINRICH JUNG was a baker in Freienseen. He was born
14 March, 1763; and died in Freienseen, 14 Jan., 1835. His
wife, whose maiden name was LOUISA MARGRETHA SCHMIDT, was

born 16 June, 1778; and died near Freienseen, 28 July, 1848.

A. DOROTHEA JUNG was the first wife of KONRAD IMMELT. She
died in Freienseen of brain fever, 29 March, 1830. After
her death her husband remarried. His eldest son by his
second wife was OTTO IMMELT, who married WILHELMINA
DAEHLER, daughter of JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER.

B. MARGRETHA JUNG was the wife of a shoemaker in Laubach.
She died of a nervous affliction in 1837.

Cc. ANNA ELISA JUNG married in 1836 HEINRICH VOLP,an oil
merchant and farmer who resided near Freienseen.

D. ELISABETHA JUNG married in 1836 LOUIS JOCHEM, a cooper
and farmer who also resided near Freienseen.

E. KATHARINA JUNG married in 1838 JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER.

SOURCES:

A SHORT VIEW OF THE DAEHLER ANCESTRY, a manuscript written
in German by Johann Konrad Daehler, 1893; and trans-
lated by Albert H. Daehler, 1939.

Research notes of Albert H. Daehler

Genealogical data gleaned from the files of the Hessian
State Archives at Darmstadt, Germany
10.

ids

12.

13.

14.

DEATH NOTICE OF JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FAMILY OF JOHANN KONRAD

CHILDREN OF

CHILDREN OF

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

DESCENDANTS

AND KATHARINA DAEHLER

HENRY JACOB
AND ELISA DAEHLER

HENRY JACOB
AND WILHELMINA DAEHLER

OF CHARLES

AND DOROTHEA SMITH
OF LOUIS C. -
AND LUCINDA M. DAEHLER

OF CHRISTIAN
AND KATHARINA STRAUB

OF AUGUST C.

AND ELISA W. GELDMACHER

OF HENRY J.
AND KATHERINE DAEHLER

OF WILLIAM C.
AND ANNA K. DAEHLER

OF CHARLES J.

AND ANNA M. QUECKBOERNER

OF CONRAD J.
AND HAZEL DAEHLER

OF CONRAD
AND EMMA GEISZ

OF LOUIS CHRISTIAN
AND ANNA ELISA DAEHLER

72

73

74

74-75

76-80

81

82-87

88-92

93-95

96-102

103

104-110

111-112

113-120
72

DEATH NOTICE OF JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER, 1897

JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER, 86, died at the home of
his son, Supervisor Henry J. Daehler, in Fair Haven
Township, on June 16, 1897, and was buried June 18th.
Interment took place in their private burial ground at
the old homestead, after which Rev. Muegge delivered
the funeral sermon in the old Lutheran church, two miles
west of Chadwick. A large congregation was in attendance.

The deceased was born in the village of Freienseen,
Hesse - Darmstadt, Germany, Feb. 6, 1811. In 1855 he with
his family, consisting of his wife, two sons, and a daughter
crossed the Atlantic for the United States and settled in
Fair Haven Township, Carroll County, on the place where he
has since lived and died in his old age.

?

While in Germany he followed the carpenter and
millwright trades, but when he arrived in this country
devoted his time to farming.

He was one of the German pioneers of Black Oak
and with a few others was one of the founders of the
German St. Paul's Lutheran Church.

Mr. Daehler was a good neighbor and was liked by
everyone who knew hin.

Nine years ago his wife passed beyond just a short
while after they had celebrated their golden wedding.

He leaves two sons, Henry J. and Louis C.-, _both.-of
Fair Haven; a daughter, Mrs. Otto Immelt, who resides in
Waterloo, Iowa; nineteen grandchildren; and sixteen great-
grandchildren to mourn his loss beside a host of friends.
73

FAMILY OF JOHANN KONRAD AND KATHARINA DAEHLER

JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER

b. 6 Feb., 1811, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt

d. 16 June, 1897, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
m. 8 Aug., 1838, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
KATHARINA JUNG

b. 22 May, 1813, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt

d. 7 Oct., 1888, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

HENRY JACOB DAEHLER

b. 9 Nov., 1839, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 11 April, 1910, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 17 Dec., 1859, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

ELISA ZUGSCHWERDT
b. 22 March, 1842, Sellenrod, Hesse
d. 27 March, 1865, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

m. 14 Feb., 1868, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
WILHELMINA FREDERICKA SOPHIA HEYER
b. 14 Dec., 1840, Daberkow, Brandenburg

d. 25 April, 1915, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

CHRISTIANA DAEHLER

b. 20 Jan., 1841, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 16 May, 1841, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
LOUIS CHRISTIAN DAEHLER

b. 26 May, 1842, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 21 Dec., 1907, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

m. 7 April, 1872, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
ANNA ELISA HARTMAN

b. 20 Feb., 1853, Golzenhein, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 20 Dec., 1924, Chadwick, Illinois

. WILHELMINA DAEHLER

b. 3 Aug., 1844, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 16 April, 1901, Columbus, Ohio

m. 4 March, 1866, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
OTTO IMMELT

b. 13 Feb., 1832, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 24 Nov., 1897, Waterloo, Iowa

FREDERICK DAEHLER
b. 20 Oct., 1846, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt
d. 20 Oct., 1846, Freienseen, Hesse-Darmstadt

still born daughter, 17 Feb., 1848, Freienseen,
Hesse-Darmstadt
CHILDREN OF HENRY JACOB AND ELISA DAEHLER

DOROTHEA DAEHLER

b. 4 April, 1860, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 8 May, 1939, Mec Cool Junction, Nebraska
m. 24 Feb., 1879, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

CHARLES SMITH
b. 10 July, 1851, Asel, Hesse-Darmstadt

d. 23 Nov., 1897, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska

LOUIS CHRISTIAN DAEHLER
b. 3 March, 1862, Fair Haven Township,
d. 14 Jan., 1908, Fair Haven Township,

m. 2 July, 1884, East Jordan, Illinois

LUCINDA MARY ZINNEL

Illinois
Illinois

b. 13 April, 1866, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 30 March, 1892, Chicago, Illinois

KATHARINA DAEHLER

b. 10 May, 1863, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 28 March, 1946, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 26 Dec., 1880, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
CHRISTIAN STRAUB

b. 14 May, 1852, Snyder County, Pennsylvania
d. 20 June, 1935, Chadwick, Illinois

ELISA WILHELMINA DAEHLER

b. 27 March, 1865, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 9 March, 1919, Elgin, Illinois

m. 9 Nov., 1887, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
AUGUST CARL GELDMACHER

b. 26 May, 1864, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

d. 19 Sept., 1944, Elgin, Illinois

CHILDREN OF HENRY JACOB AND WILHELMINA DAEHLER

HENRY JACOB DAEHLER

b. 28 Jan., 1869, Fair Haven Township,
d. 13 March, 1961, Sterling, Illinois
m. 24 Feb., 1904, Fair Haven Township,
KATHERINE KEIL

b. 17 Oct., 1879, Fair Haven Township,
d. 20 Aug., 1952, Chadwick, Illinois

WILLIAM CHRISTIAN DAEHLER
b. 15 Aug., 1870, Fair Haven Township,

Illinois
Illinois

Illinois

Illinois

d. 15 March, 1964, Spring Valley, Minnesota

m. 10 July, 1894, Mt. Carroll, Illinois
ANNA KATHRYN SCHREINER

b. 18 Feb., 1874, Mt. Carroll, Illinois
d. 11 Nov., 1948, Waterloo, Iowa

74
LO.

ANNA MARIA DAEHLER

b. 13 July, 1872, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 28 April, 1902, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
m. 17 Jan., 1894, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
CHARLES J. QUECKBOERNER

b. 3 Aug., 1870, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 20 Feb., 1948, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
CONRAD JOHN DAEHLER

b. 5S May, 1874, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 9 June, 1953, Sterling, Illinois

m. 10 Feb., 1910, Cherry Grove, Illinois

HAZEL ETHRIDGE

b. 27 Nov., 1885, Carroll County, Illinois

dad. 7 May, 1971, Morrison, Illinois

LOUISE DAEHLER

b. 15 Aug., 1876, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 20 April, 1877, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
EMMA DAEHLER

b. 10 May, 1878, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 28 April, 1966, Morrison, Illinois

m. 5 Feb., 1902, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
CONRAD GEISZ ;

b. 12 March, 1872, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

da. 25 July, 1943, Chadwick,

Tllinois

75
it,

Lil.

DESCENDANTS OF CHARLES AND DOROTHEA SMITH

WILLIAM HENRY ADAM SMITH
b. 10 March, 1880, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 6 Jan., 1966, Exeter, Nebraska
m. 13 Jan., 1904, Exeter, Nebraska
MARTHA ELIZABETH MILLER

Feb., 1883, Coleta, Illinois
March, 1964, Friend, Nebraska

WILLIAM SMITH
April, 1881, Chadwick, Illinois

June, 1952, Exeter, Nebraska

Oct., 1905, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska
V. CUDABACK

July, 1887, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska
July, 1967, Whittier, California

LOUISE BERTHA SMITH

Aug., 1883, Audubon County, Iowa

Nov., 1946, York, Nebraska

Feb., 1904, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska
PHILIP SMITH

Oct., 1876, Hatsbach, Germany

Aug., 1945, Bradshaw, Nebraska

A. HILMA ELIZABETH SMITH

18 Dec., 1904, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska
23 Oct., 1974, York, Nebraska
9 March, 1927, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska

HAROLD STEWART NORQUEST
15 March, 1901, York, Nebraska
16 March, 1957, York, Nebraska

b. 2
d. 24
LOUIS
b. 23
d. 6
m. 13
PEARL
b. 16
d. 27
b. 20
d. 12
m. 7
HENRY
b. 7
d. 1

b.

d.

m.

b.

d.

1.

MARCELLA MAE NORQUEST

Ds
m.

10 May, 1928, York, Nebraska

8 June, 1947, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska

KENNETH MC LAIN

b.

a.

27 Aug., 1924, York, Nebraska

RICHARD MERLE MC LAIN

b. 5 May, 1949, York, Nebraska

m. 7 June, 1969, Hampton, Nebraska
LOIS ANN HEIDEN

b. 10 Dec., 1948, York, Nebraska

1. ANGELA CHRISTINE MC LAIN
b. 5S Nov., 1969, Lincoln, Nebraska

2. BRENDA JENEINE MC LAIN
b. 8 Dec., 1972, Dumas, Texas
TT

b. MILTON GENE MC LAIN
b. 15 April, 1952, York, Nebraska
m. 13 June, 1971, York, Nebraska
LINDA KAY MC GREW
b. 9 Feb., 1952, Macomb, Illinois

1. STACIE LYNN MC LAIN
b. 24 Nov., 1971, Amarillo, Texas

2. DELBERT LELAND NORQUEST
b. 2 Aug., 1930, York, Nebraska
m. 26 April, 1953, McCool Junction, Nebraska
MARGERY RAY GREUTER
b. 26 May, 1934, Hastings, Nebraska

a. JANALEE NORQUEST
b. 11 Sept., 1956, York, Nebraska

b. KENT STEWART NORQUEST
b. 11 June, 1959, Hastings, Nebraska

3. BURTON GENE NORQUEST
b. 17 Feb., 1935, York, Nebraska
m. 30 March, 1958, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska
NANCY RANEE CRAMER
b. 20Dec., 1938, Loup City, Nebraska

a. BILLY GENE NORQUEST

b. 18 March, 1959, York, Nebraska
b. LYNN ANN NORQUEST

b. 9 April, 1962, York, Nebraska

ce. LARRY ALLEN NORQUEST
b. 9 April, 1962, York, Nebraska

d. JEFF HAROLD NORQUEST

b. 25 Dec., 1967, York, Nebraska
B. CLARA MAE SMITH
b. 5 May, 1908, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska
d. 29 Nov., 1973, Lincoln, Nebraska

m. 13 July, 1936, Cheyenne, Nebraska
MERVIN JAMES MC GILL

b. 26 April, 1904, Garland, Nebraska
d. 6 July, 1968, Lincoln, Nebraska

1. JAMES HENRY MC GILL
b. 28 June, 1939, Lincoln, Nebraska

m. l1May, 1959, Yutan, Nebraska
MARY ANNE LARLOFF
b. 27Nov., 1939, Omaha, Nebraska

a. LORI ANN MC GILL
b. 15 Aug., 1960, Omaha, Nebraska
78

b. JEFFREY JAMES MC GILL
b. 2 Nov., 1962, Omaha, Nebraska

ec. LIESA GAYE MC GILL
b. 28 Jan., 1964, Lincoln, Nebraska

d. LYNETTE KRISTEN MC GILL
b. 4 Sept., 1968, Omaha, Nebraska

2. DANIEL LEROY MC GILL
b. 10 July, 1942, Lincoln, Nebraska
m. 25 March, 1961, Council Bluffs, Iowa
IOLA KAY TWIFORD
b. 23 Nov., 1943, Rosalie, Nebraska

a. SHERRI LYNN MC GILL
b. 14 Oct., 1961, Fort Collins, Colorado

b. SUZANNE KAY MC GILL
b. 1 March, 1964, Lincoln, Nebraska

C. DOROTHEA ALMA GRACE SMITH
b. 21 May, 1912, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska
d. 15 April, 1975, Fort Collins, Colorado
m. 4 June, 1933, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska
JOHN ANTON SHIMONEK
b. 20 May, 1908, Wilber, Nebraska

1. DOTTIE JO ANN SHIMONEK
b. 12 Sept., 1934, Ewing, Nebraska
m. 18 April, 1957, Ashland, Nebraska
ROY ELBERT SCHIEFELBEIN
b. 16 Oct., 1930, New Understood, South Dakota

a. NANCY JO SCHIEFELBEIN
b. 31 July, 1962, St. Louis, Missouri

2. GARY JOHN SHIMONEK
b. 28 Nov., 1944, Fremont, Nebraska
m. 4 Dec., 1965, Denver, Colorado DIV. 1970
CHARLENE RAE SIMMA
m. 14 July, 1973, Denver, Colorado
MARY ANNE BOURRET
b. 2 Nov., 1950, Minneapolis, Minnesota

IV. CLARA MINNA FREDERICKA SMITH

b. 20 Dec., 1886, Audubon County, Iowa
d. 8 April, 1946, York, Nebraska
m 6 Feb., 1907, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska

ROBERT WILLIAM YOUNG
b. 24 Sept., 1878, Morrison, Illinois
d. 29 March, 1961, Geneva, Nebraska

A. still born son, 17 Aug., 1908, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska
79

B. BOYD OLIVER YOUNG
b. 9 March, 1912, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska

m. 30 Dec., 19836, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska
ALBERTA ERNESTINE KLONE
b. 26 May, 1912, Mc Cool Junction, Nebraska

1. RICHARD LOWELL YOUNG
b. 15 Nov., 1937, York, Nebraska
m. 6 Jan., 1967, Aurora, Colorado
DAWN GONYE BLEI
b. 9 Dec.,, 1937, York, Nebraska

2. LINDA LORENE YOUNG
b. 17 March, 1937, York, Nebraska
m. 31 May., 1959, York, Nebraska
CLAUDE EUGENE BAILEY
b. 29 Aug., 1934, York, Nebraska

a. TIMOTHY BAILEY
b. 18 April, 1960, York, Nebraska

b. TERRY BAILEY
b. 23 May., 1961, York, Nebraska

c. KYLE BAILEY
b. 24 June, 1966, York, Nebraska

3, PHYLIS KAY YOUNG
b. 11 Oct., 1946, York, Nebraska
m. 6 March, 1971, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska
NEIL ALLEN WEST
b. 21 Oct., 1947, Seward, Nebraska

a. BRIAN CARL WEST
b. 30 June, 1973, York, Nebraska

C. HELEN ONITA YOUNG
b. 28 Feb., 1920, Me Cool, Junction, Nebraska
m. 28 June, 1941, Las Vegas, Nevada
RICHARD ELWOOD HAGER
b. 1 Nov., 1919, Fairmont, Nebraska

1. DENNIS GERALD HAGER
b. 26 July, 1942, Los Angeles, California
m. 15 Aug., 1965, Columbus, Ohio
LINDA LEE. CARPENTER
b. 20 Jan., 1946, Columbus, Ohio

a. TISHIA DAWN HAGER
b. 1 May, 1969, Columbus, Ohio
80

2. VIRGIL LEE HAGER
b. 24 Jan., 1950, York, Nebraska
m. 1 Oct., 1967, Me Cool Junction, Nebraska
PATRICIA ANN MILLER
b. 10 Aug., 1950, York, Nebraska

a. KARRY ANN HAGER
b. 3 Feb., 1968, York, Nebraska

b. MACHELL LEE HAGER
b. 21 Feb., 1972, Columbus, Ohio

3. ROLAND DEAN HAGER
b. ll Aug., 1954, York, Nebraska

V. LENA HENRIETTA SMITH
b. 4 March, 1889, Audubon County, Iowa
d. in infancy
I,

sa

DESCENDANTS OF LOUIS C. AND LUCINDA M. DAEHLER

ALVIN AUGUST DAEHLER

b. 12 May, 1885, Chadwick, Illinois

d. 8 May, 1964, Santa Cruz, California
m. 25 Dec., 1910, Milledgeville, Illinois
DAISY MARTHA DERR

b. 24 March, 1885, Milledgeville, Illinois
d. 22 Aug., 1936, Clinton, Iowa

A. LEO ERNEST DAEHLER
b. 8 July, 1912, Chicago, Illinois
m. 25 Dec., 1936, Clinton, Iowa DIV.
MILDRED ELIZABETH TILLOTSON
b. 20 April,1915, Washington, Iowa
m. 9 Dec., 1946, Des Moines, Iowa
MOYA GLADYS COOK ,
b. 10 April, 1920, Goulburn, N.S.W., Australia

1. RICHARD ALLEN DAEHLER
b. 17 Jan., 1938, Clinton, Iowa
m. 26 June, 1956, Clinton, Iowa DIV.
JANICE GRELL
m. 15 June, 1968, Clinton, Iowa
KAY JOAN ALBRIGHT
b. 2 April, 1948

a. KIMBERLY ANN DAEHLER
b. 12 Jan., 1957, De Witt, Iowa

b. KRISTA KAY DAEHLER
b. 23 Oct., 1958, Clinton, Iowa

c. KURT ALLAN DAEHLER
b. 19 Dec., 1959, Clinton, Iowa

2. THOMAS GEORGE DAEHLER
b. 7 Dec., 1941, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
m. 6 June, 1962, Clinton, Iowa
MARIETTA MAY WILLIAMS
b. 7 May, 1941

a. KEITH ALLEN DAEHLER
b. 1 May, 1966, Indianapolis, Indiana

b. KATHERINE MARIE DAEHLER
b. 21 Aug., 1969, Indianapolis, Indiana

3. JACQUELINE MOYA DAEHLER
b. 10 July, 1951, Milwaukee, Wisconsin

4. WILLIAM FREDERICK LEO DAEHLER
b. 24 June, 1953, Milwaukee, Wisconsin

LEO HENRY DAEHLER
b. 28 Jan., 1887, Chadwick, Illinois

1946

1965

81
DESCENDANTS OF CHRISTIAN AND KATHARINA STRAUB

ANNA ISABELLE STRAUB
jor
m.

len
d.

A.

“
e

19 May, 1882, Fair Haven: Township
20 Dec., 1902, Chadwick, Illinois
WILLIAM LEWIS of

26 Feb., 1879, Peoria, Kansas

10 Nov., 1952, Dixon, Illinois

CECIL ADELBERT LEWIS

b.
d.

8 May, 1904, Chadwick, Illinois
5 March, 1921, Dixon, Illinois

KATHRYN LAURA LEWIS

b.

8 May, 1909, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 21 Dec., 1929, Chicago, Illinois
PAUL HENNING HANSON
b. 19-Oct., 1898, Olsberg, Kansas

d.

7 Jan., 1963, Sarasota, Florida

m. 12 Nov., 1966, Sarasota, Florida
ELMER EARL IKERMAN

b.

8 Oct., 1901, Warren, Ohio

1. BEVERLY CECILE HANSON

Ds

7 Oct., 1934, Chicago, Illinois

m. 29 April, 1955, Sarasota, Florida
HOWARD HALL BAREFOOT

be

a.

26 March, 1928, Braddock, Pennsylvania

ALAN REED BAREFOOT
b. 15 July, 1956, Sarasota, Florida

BRADLEY PAUL BAREFOOT
b. 4 Dec., 1957, Sarasota, Florida

STEVEN NEAL BAREFOOT
b. 15 Sept., 1960, Sarasota, Florida

CHARLES EDGAR LEWIS

b. 25 Nov., 1911, Chadwick, Illinois

d. 24 Dec., 1972, Morrison, Illinois

m. 14 Sept., 1935, Stillman Valley, Illinois
RITA MAC ROBERTS

b. 13 July, 1915, Chana, Illinois

1. JUDITH RAE LEWIS

B.
m.

21 March, 1937, Kansas City, Missouri
1 Sept., 1955, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

RAYMOND LA VERN ADOLPH

b.

a.

b.

19 Oct., 1936, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

TIM SCOTT ADOLPH
b. 10 May, 1958, Sterling, Illinois

DAVID ERIC ADOLPH
b. 5S Dec., 1963, Morrison, Illinois

82
Ti.

Til.

WILLIAM FRANKLIN STRAUB

b. 25 Jan., 1884, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 16 Sept., 1950, Rockford, Illinois

m. 10 Nov., 1910, Freeport, Illinois

ELIZABETH LILY LARKEY

b. 17 Aug., 1883, Coleta, Illinois

dad. 4 Oct., 1970, Morrison, Illinois

A. LYLE CLARKE STRAUB
b. 23 March, 1919, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 18 Jan., 1947, Rockford, Illinois
EVELYN MARGARET BOYLE
b. 27 Nov., 1921, Milwaukee, Wisconsin

1. GERALD WILLIAM STRAUB

b. 9 Oct., 1951, Rockford, Illinois
2. DENNIS JOHN STRAUB

b. 18 Jan., 1959, Rockford, Illinois
CLARA LOUISA STRAUB
b. 16 June, 1889, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 27 Feb., 1971, Mendota, Illinois
m. 7 Sept., 1909, Freeport, Illinois
DONALD DAVID CLARKE
b. 30 Jan., 1892, Downers Grove, Illinois
d. 7 Aug., 1968, Van Orin, Illinois

A. ORVILLE RAYMOND CLARKE
b. 24 June, 1910, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 10 Sept., 1940, Memphis, Tennessee
SARAH LOUISE WATSON
b 13 April, 1915, Troy, Tennessee

1. JACK DONALD CLARKE

b. 12 Nov., 1944, Ripon, Wisconsin
m. 17 Nov., 1961, Ripon, Wisconsin
PHYLLIS ANN HYDE

b. 18 Oct., 1942, Ripon, Wisconsin

a. TODD JEFFREY CLARKE
b. 5 Aug., 1962, Ripon, Wisconsin

b. KATHLEEN JANE CLARKE
b. 29 July, 1964, Fond du Lac, Wisconsin

c. KRISTINE ANN CLARKE
b. 21 July, 1966, Ripon, Wisconsin

2. JEFFREY ORVILLE CLARKE
b. 18 June, 1947, Ripon, Wisconsin
m. 7 Sept., 1968, Ripon, Wisconsin
GAIL ANN HARMS
b. 31 Aug., 1947, Ripon, Wisconsin

83
84

a. MELISSA RENEE CLARKE
b. 30 Nov., 1971, Wausau, Wisconsin

3. JANE LOUISE CLARKE
b. 18 June, 1947, Ripon, Wisconsin
d. 21 June, 1947, Ripon, Wisconsin

4. JAY NEWTON CLARKE
b. 9 April, 1951, Ripon, Wisconsin
m. 24 July, 1971, Ripon, Wisconsin
HOLLY ANN HAMMEN
b. 3 Jan., 1952, Ripon, Wisconsin

5. JANE WATSON CLARKE
b. 12 June, 1953, Ripon, Wisconsin
m. 7 July, 1973, Ripon, Wisconsin
GARY MARLAND PAGE
b. 6 May, 1950, Ripon, Wisconsin

LA VERE HARRY CLARKE
b. 18 March, 1913, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 29 Dec., 1941, Peoria, Illinois
LOIS PHALEN
b. 29 Dec., 1915, Sterling, Illinois

1. SANDRA JANINE CLARKE
b. 26 March, 1947, Mendota, Illinois
m. 11 June, 1966, Peoria, Illinois DIV.
LYNN HAROLD STEWART
b. 13 March, 1943, Fulton, New York

m. 5 May, 1973, Peoria, Illinois
JOSEPH ROBERT MILLS
b. 6 Feb., 1945, Peoria, Illinois

a. LISA JOANN STEWART
b. 30 Jan., 1967, Stevens Point, Wisconsin

b. AARON MARK STEWART
b. 12 Sept., 1969, Milwaukee, Wisconsin

2. JOY ANN CLARKE
b. 15 Nov., 1949, Mendota, Illinois
m. 19 Sept., 1970, Peoria, Illinois
CARL B. HENDERSON
b. 3 July, 1947, Marion, Indiana

IONE ALICE CLARKE

b. 29 Sept., 1914, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 23 April, 1937, Chicago, Illinois
JULIUS JAMES BUCHANAN

b. 20 Sept., 1913, Redgranite, Wisconsin
LAWRENCE JAMES BUCHANAN

b. 31 March, 1939, Mendota, Illinois
d. 19 March, 1964, Denver, Colorado

m. 18 July, 1958, Denver, Colorado

BARBARA ANN BACON

b. 15 March, 1940, Denver, Colorado

a. REBECCA ANN BUCHANAN

b. 18 May, 1959, Denver, Colorado
BONNIE JEAN BUCHANAN
b. 4 May, 1941, Mendota, Illinois
m. 1 Nov., 1959, Pine, Colorado DIV.
GEORGE HOWARD DUNHAM
b. 23 May, 1930, Denver, Colorado
m. 19 Aug., 1974, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM DAMIANO
b. I'7 Feb., 1934, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
a. TIMOTHY DON DUNHAM

b. 12 June, 1961, Denver, Colorado
b. ANDREW LEE DUNHAM

b. 12 April, 1963, Denver, Colorado
HEATHER KAY BUCHANAN
b. 4 Feb., 1944, Denver, Colorado
m. 1 Nov., 1963, Durango, Colorado DIV.
DARREL SMYTH
m. 5 Sept., 1965, Williston, North Dakota
SYD FLEXHAUG
b. 3 Dec., 1933, Williston, North Dakota
a. STACY LEE SMYTH

b. 21 Aug., 1964, Denver, Colorado
b. GALYN HAROLD FLEXHAUG

b. 23 July, 1966, Denver, Colorado
CLARKE EDWARD BUCHANAN
b. 19 July, 1947, Mendota, Illinois
m. 19 Aug., 1964, Indian Hills, Colorado
NANCY LOUISE SINDT
b. 19 June, 1947, Denver, Colorado
m. 28 Aug., 1971, Colorado Springs, Colorado

KATHRYN LEE PIERCE
b. 1 June, 1953, Kingsville, Texas

a. LARRY RICHARD BUCHANAN
b. 13 Feb., 1965, Denver, Colorado

JOHN ARNOLD BUCHANAN
b. 24 Nov., 1952, Denver, Colorado

1974

1964

DIV.

85

LOT 1
6. ELIZABETH ANNE BUCHANAN
b. 27 May, 1954, Denver, Colorado
m. 8 June, 1974, Indian Hills, Colorado
RANDALL WARREN CLARK
b. 27 Nov., 1953, Poplar Bluff, Missouri

EVAN MONROE CLARKE
b. 18 Sept., 1916, Chadwick, Illinois

MYRENE ISABELLE CLARKE
b. 13 July, 1918, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 7 Sept., 1939, Mendota, Illinois
LOUIS PATRICK ROTH
b. 7 Jan., 1907, Chicago, Illinois
1. DAVID LOUIS ROTH
b. 31 Dec., 1941, Chicago, Illinois
m. 16 Oct., 1960, Princeton, Illinois

JUDITH ELAINE SAPP
b. 8 Feb., 1941, Princeton, Illinois

a. STEVEN KENT ROTH
b. 7 May, 1961, Princeton, Illinois

b. CHRISTINE ANNE ROTH
b. 13 April, 1963, Princeton, Illinois

c. KELLY ELAINE ROTH
b. 31 Jan., 1965, Princeton, Illinois

d. MICHAEL DAVID ROTH
b. 28 Aug., 1969, Leon, Iowa

2. MICHAEL GORDON ROTH
b. 27 Nov., 1943, Chicago, Illinois
m. 2 Aug., 1964, Princeton, Illinois
MARIE KATHLEEN ANTHONY
b. 20 Sept., 1946, Princeton, Illinois

a. WILLIAM MICHAEL ROTH
b. 5S Jan., 1965, Ames, Iowa

b. JAMES ANTHONY ROTH

b. 24 Dec., 1968, Kansas City, Missouri

3. PATRICIA KAY ROTH
b. 12 Feb., 1956, Chicago, Illinois

F. ARNOLD LINCOLN CLARKE

b. 13 Feb., 1921, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 10 June, 1950, Somonauk, Illinois
PATRICIA LA BOLLE

b. 17 March, 1918, Somonauk, Illinois

86
IV.

MELVIN CONRAD STRAUB

b. 1 Nov., 1896, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
m. 19 Dec., 1933, Galena, Illinois

DOROTHY ELTHEDA FERRIS

b. 13 May, 1905, Whiteside County, Illinois

d. 28 Oct., 1966, Sterling, Illinois

A. MARJORIE JOYCE STRAUB
b. 6 Sept., 1936, Freeport, Illinois
m. 23 April, 1970, Lake Forest, Illinois
JAMES ROBERT GLACKING
b. 23 April, 1928, Waterman, Illinois

B. JOHN LOUIS STRAUB
b. 22 Jan., 1938, Freeport, Illinois
m. 17 July, 1956, Holly Springs, Mississippi
ARVILLA ROSE KELLER
b. 3 Feb., 1939, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

1. MICHAEL JOHN STRAUB
b. 2 Sept., 1960, Morrison, Illinois

2. CHRISTINE ANNE STRAUB
b. 3 Jan., 1964, Morrison, Illinois

3, MARK LOUIS STRAUB
b. 20 Aug., 1967, Morrison, Illinois

87
88

DESCENDANTS OF AUGUST C. AND ELISA W. GELDMACHER

I. WALTER CARL GELDMACHER
b. 25 April, 1888, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 4 Nov., 1964, Elgin, Illinois
m. 16 April, 1913, Kiester, Minnesota
EMMA M. GEORS
b. 27 Dec., 1891, Dundee, Illinois

A. ROBERT CARL GELDMACHER
b. 22 April, 1917, Elgin, Illinois
m. 27 Sept., 1941, St. Charles, Illinois
THERESA SWANBERG
b. 23 March, 1921, St. Charles, Illinois

_ L. ANN MARIE GELDMACHER

mid. 26 June, 1942, De Kalb, Illinois
m: 14 Sept., 1968, Hoboken, New Jersey
’ PETER ALICANDRI

b. 1 Dec., 1936, Brooklyn, New York

a. ANDREW ROBERT ALICANDRI

b. 10 March, 1970, Brooklyn, New York
b. VICTORIA THERESE ALICANDRI

b. 13 Feb., 1974, Hoboken, New Jersey

2. CECILY LOUISE GELDMACHER
b. 24 Jan., 1946, Lafayette, Indiana

3. MARY ELLEN GELDMACHER
b. 14 June, 1947, Lafayette, Indiana

B. RALPH RUSSELL GELDMACHER
b. 17 Sept., 1918, Elgin, Illinois

m. 20 Dec., 1945, Milton, Massachusetts
MARILYN CRUCHSHANK
b. 14 Nov., 1922, Milton, Massachusetts

1. RALPH RUSSELL GELDMACHER
b. 30 Sept., 1949, Milton, Massachusetts
m. 14 Aug., 1971, Milton, Massachusetts
DIANE O NEIL
b. 12 March, 195@, Milton, Massachusetts

Meru ssa
a.-MELISSA AMY GELDMACHER
b. 12 Nov., 1974, Milton, Massachusetts

bi RALPH Rossetl CeLohuqterR ie nov oTH (798
CHRISTOPHER ALAN GELDMACHER ‘
b. 9 May, 1951, Milton, Massachusetts

re)

3. SARAH JANE GELDMACHER
b. 23 Nov., 1952, Milton, Massachusetts

4. PETER WALTER GELDMACHER
b. 25 Oct., 1955, Milton, Massachusetts
89

C. RUSSELL LLOYD GELDMACHER
b. 30 Aug., 1927, Elgin, Illinois
m. 19 June, 1954, Elgin, Illinois
CATHERINE SCHMITENDORF
b. 30 Nov., 1933, Elgin, Illinois

1. JAY LINDSEY GELDMACHER
b. 21 Oct., 1955, Kansas City, Kansas

2. CATHY ANN GELDMACHER
b. 2 May, 1958, Kansas City, Kansas

3. LISA MARY GELDMACHER
b. 26 May, 1962, Kansas City, Kansas

4. THOMAS RUSSELL GELDMACHER
b. 4 June, 1970, Elgin, Illinois

D. DONALD EUGENE GELDMACHER
b. 21 March, 1929, Elgin, Illinois
m. 1 Sept., 1956, Elgin, Illinois
BEVERLY ANN BROCKNER
b. 6 May, 1931, Elgin, Illinois

1. KAREN JEAN GELDMACHER
b. 26 March, 1958, Elgin, Illinois

2. KURT WALTER GELDMACHER
b. 10 March, 1960, Elgin, Illinois

3. KRIS ANN GELDMACHER
b. 20 Sept., 1967, Mesa, Arizona

II. ARTHUR GELDMACHER
b. 3 April, 1890, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 24 Dec., 1910, Elgin, Illinois DIV. 1952
HELEN HUBBARD
b. 23 Nov., ‘1892, Elgin,. Illinois

A. DOROTHY ESTELLA GELDMACHER
b. 19 Sept., 1911, Elgin, Illinois
m. 26 April, 1935, Elgin, Illinois
MAXWELL GERALD SHUMAN
b. 10 Sept., 1907, Goshen, Indiana

1. GERALD LEE SHUMAN
b. 19 Feb., 1944, Elgin, Illinois
m. 13 July, 1963, Elgin, Illinois
DOROTHEA JEAN MILLER
b. 15 July, 1945

a. LARRY WAYNE SHUMAN

b. 5 June, 1964, New York
b. JOHN ROBERT SHUMAN

b. 11 Aug., 1965, Elgin, Illinois
c. THOMAS ALYAN SHUMAN

b. 5 March, 1975, Germany
IIl.

Iv.

90

B. GLADYS JANE GELDMACHER
b. 16 May, 1915, Elgin, Illinois

m. 15 Feb., 1940, Elgin, Illinois
LAWRENCE G. ANDREWS
b. 13 Oct., 1915, Humboldt, Illinois
1. KAREN LEE ANDREWS
b. 1 Nov., 1945, Elgin, Illinois
m. 15 June,” 1963 DIV. 1968

Winkiam £. Cox

2. CAROL LYNN ANDREWS
b. 1 Sept., 1948, Bay City, Michigan
m. 8 Jan., 1967, Elgin, Illinois
ROBERT DAVIS

b. 13 Jan., 1947, Chicago, Illinois
a. ROBERT DAVIS
b. 29 Aug., 1968, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
b. CHRISTENE DAVIS .
b. 27 Aug., 1971, Elgin, Illinois
ec. STEVEN DAVIS
b. 24 Oct., 1972, Elgin, Illinois

RICHARD GELDMACHER

b. 1 April, 1893, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 15 June, 19448, Seattle, Washington
m. 26 Aug., 1922, Chicago, Illinois
DOLORES THAYER

b. 14 Sept., 1903, Chicago, Illinois

OTTO LEON GELDMACHER

b. 7 Jan., 1896, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 11 Aug., 1918, Rockford, Illinois
MARGARET LENTZ GREEN
b. 5 Dec., 1900, Nashville, Tennessee
A. EARL LEON .GELDMACHER
b. 16 May, 1921, Detroit, Michigan
m. 29 May, 1941 DIV. 1951
REBECCA CHARLENE FOSTER
b. 31 Jan., 1920, Mayfield, Kentucky
m. 4 May, 1951
HELEN SUE (HENDRICK) MONTGOMERY
b. 28 Dec., 1924, Highland Park, Michigan

1. SUE ANNE MONTGOMERY GELDMACHER
b. 11 Dec., 1944, Detroit, Michigan
m. 20 July, 1964
JOSEPH EUGENE THOMISEE
b. 19 Oct., 1946, Colfax, Louisiana

a. SHERRY LYNN THOMISEE

b. 4 Aug., 1965, Colfax, Louisiana
b. TRACEY RENEE THOMISEE

b. 4 Dec., 1968, Houma, Louisiana
91

2. MICHAEL JOHN MONTGOMERY GELDMACHER
b. ll Feb., 1947, Detroit, Michigan
m. 10 June, 1966
CHRISTINE MARIE RAMSEY
b. 13 Sept., 1947, Detroit, Michigan

a. MICHAEL JOHN GELDMACHER JR.

b. 1Jdan., 1968, Detroit, Michigan
b. DOUGLAS ALAN GELDMACHER

b. 29 June, 1970, Detroit, Michigan

3. ANDREA CAROL GELDMACHER
b. 25 Dec., 1959, Detroit, Michigan

4. BRIAN EARL GELDMACHER
b. 22 April, 1961, Detroit, Michigan

B. JOYCE ISABEL GELDMACHER
b. 28 Sept., 1922, Detroit, Michigan
m. 3 June, 1944, Detroit, Michigan
JAMES RUDOLPH RAETZ

b. 11 Feb., 1923, Detroit, Michigan

1. JAMES EARL RAETZ
b. 13 Aug., 1945, Detroit, Michigan
m. 17 May, 1969, Detroit, Michigan
PATRICIA ANN HUTTON
b. 26 Nov., 1947, Detroit, Michigan

a. CYNTHIA RENEE RAETZ
b. 4 Feb., 1971, Detroit, Michigan
b. RACHEL LYN RAETZ
b. 13 April, 1975, Southfield, Michigan

2. THOMAS ALAN RAETZ

b. 12 Jan., 1948, Detroit, Michigan

m. 20 May, 1972, Southfield, Michigan
LESLIE ALANE JOHNSON

b. 15 Oct., 1948, Detroit, Michigan

3. DAVID ERNEST RAETZ
b. 15 July, 1951, Detroit, Michigan
m. 1 July, 1972, Farmington Hills, Michigan
LINDA ANN DOUGHERTY
b. 27 Oct., 1951, Highland Park, Michigan

4. DANIEL ARTHUR RAETZ
b. 1 Oct., 1954, Detroit, Michigan

5. JOHN QUENTIN RAETZ
b. 20 Nov., 1957, Detroit, Michigan

C. JANET MAE GELDMACHER
b. 13 April, 1932, Detroit, Michigan
m. 12 March, 1956, Detroit, Michigan DIV. 1964
JOHN DILLOW
b. 6 March, 1928, Virginia
1. JERMAINE RENE DILLOW
b. 21 June, 1959, Detroit, Michigan

bo

JEFFREY SHAWN DILLOW
b. 24 Sept., 1960, Detroit, Michigan

3. JENNIFER LYN DILLOW
b. 7 Sept., 1962, Detroit, Michigan

BETTY LOUISE GELDMACHER

b. 17 Jan., 1935, Detroit, Michigan

m. 25 July, 1953, Pearl Harbor, Hawaii
ALASTAIR MARTIN

b. 30 April, 1931, Detroit, Michigan

1. KURT DOUGLAS MARTIN
b. 4 Oct., 1954, Detroit, Michigan

2. BRUCE ALAN MARTIN
b. 2 March, 1956, Detroit, Michigan

3. PAMELA JEANNE MARTIN
b. 26 May, 1959, Detroit, Michigan

4. HUGH RUSSELL MARTIN
b. 17 April, 1964, Detroit, Michigan

5. ROSS ALASTAIR MARTIN
b. 21 June, 1967, Detroit, Michigan

6. STEPHANIE LOUISE MARTIN
b. 31 May, 1969, Detroit, Michigan

V. MARION E. GELDMACHER

b.
m.

3 Feb., 1900, Chadwick, Illinois
11 April, 1925, Elgin, Illinois

ROBERT M. COLEMAN

Bs

A.

25 April, 1899, Milledgeville, Illinois

LOIS ANN COLEMAN
b. 8 Aug., 1928, Sterling, Illinois

m. 27 May, 1951, Milledgeville, Illinois

HARLON K. JENNINGS
b. 20 March, 1925, Fitchville, Ohio

1. JEANNETTE LYNN JENNINGS
b. 13 Jan., 1953, Ashland, Ohio

2. CAROL SUE JENNINGS
b. 25 Nov., 1955, Norwalk, Ohio

3. ANN MARIE JENNINGS
b. 21 Feb., 1960, Norwalk, Ohio

92
DESCENDANTS OF HENRY JACOB AND KATHERINE DAEHLER

I. LAURA MARIA DAEHLER
b. 9 Feb., 1905, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
m. 15 June, 1968, Chadwick, Illinois
JOHN GEORGE DODEN
b. 22 Nov., 1903, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 14 Sept., 1973, Savanna, Illinois

II. VERNON CONRAD DAEHLER
b. 12 Feb., 1908, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 24 Dec., 1930, Milledgeville, Illinois
ROSY FRIEDA ALBER
b. 25 Sept., 1909, Chadwick, Illinois

A. DELORED MARIE DAEHLER
b. 2 April, 1934, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 8 Jan., 1956, Chadwick, Illinois
LAWRENCE IBEN :
b. 14 June, 1930, Sterling, Illinois

1. GARY BERNARD IBEN
b. 12 July, 1957, Savanna, Illinois

2. CRAIG ALAN IBEN
b. 11 July, 1959, Savanna, Illinois

3. SHARON SUE IBEN
b. 23 Aug., 1963, Savanna, Illinois

4, AMY LYNN IBEN
b. 28 Sept., 1967, Savanna, Illinois

B. RONALD EUGENE DAEHLER
b. 7 Feb., 1938, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 16 Aug., 1958, Chadwick, Illinois
JEANNETTE FRIEDERICH
b. 19 Feb., 1937, Chadwick, Illinois

1. DEE ANN DAEHLER
b. 5 Nov., 1960, Ames, Iowa

2. KAREN SUE DAEHLER
b. 5 April, 1963, Ames, lowa
d. 6 April, 1963, Ames, Iowa

C. MERVYN HENRY DAEHLER
b. 13 Aug., 1942, Freeport, Illinois
m. 20 June, 1965, Bedford, Iowa
REBECCA TIMBERLAKE
b. 5 April, 1942, St. Joseph, Missouri

93
Til.

D.

94

1. JENNIFER KAY DAEHLER
b. 27 Jan., 1969, Waukegan, Illinois

2. CHRISTINA CAROL DAEHLER
' pb. 1 April, 1971, Waukegan, Illinois

3. DEBORAH SUZANNE DAEHLER
b. 21 Aug., 1973, Waukegan, Illinois

MARVIN WILLIAM DAEHLER

b. 13 Aug., 1942, Freeport, Illinois
m. 28 Aug., 1965, Maywood, Illinois

JUNE KELSON

b. 3 June, 1941, Chicago, Illinois

1. CURTIS CHRISTOPER DAEHLER
b. 30 Oct., 1969, Northampton, Massachusetts

2. JOSHUA EVAN DAEHLER ;
b. 7 March, 1973, Northampton, Massachusetts

3. RENEE ELLEN DAEHLER
b. 7 Aug., 1974, Northampton, Massachusetts

CLARA GOLDA EMMA DAEHLER

b.

7 July, 1913, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

m. 23 March, 1937, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
HOWARD RAYMOND ETNYRE

Bb.

A.

30 July, 1908, Mt. Carroll, Illinois

WILMA CAROL ETNYRE

b. 25 Feb., 1940, Savanna, Illinois
m. 12 Aug., 1962, Chadwick, Illinois
J. VERNE WOLFE

b. 9 Aug., 1939, Beatrice, Nebraska
1. DAVID VERNE WOLFE

b. 22 Oct., 1963, Freeport, Illinois

2. BRIAN JAMES WOLFE
b. 7 March, 1967, Geneva, Illinois

3. DOUGLAS HOWARD WOLFE
b. 28 May, 1970, Hazeltown, Pennsylvania

DENNIS HOWARD ETNYRE

b. 28 Aug., 1945, Savanna, Illinois

m. 29 July, 1967, Sterling, Illinois
DIANE LYNN DITTMAR

b. 21 Aug., 1947, Savanna, Illinois

1. DEREK ALAN ETNYRE
b. 8 Sept., 1968, Rockford, Illinois

2. DEREN DANIEL ETNYRE
b. 4 Dec., 1971, Clinton, Iowa
C. DARRELL GENE ETNYRE
b. 3 Jdan., 1949, Savanna, Illinois
m. 6 July, 1974, Milledgeville, Illinois
CINDY JANE DITTMAR
b. 7 March, 1955, Sterling, Illinois

1. JASON CLIFFORD ETNYRE
b. 27 March, 1975, Clinton, Iowa

IV. VELDA ANNA LIZZIE DAEHLER

b. 24 Oct., 1916, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
m. 26 May, 1938, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
DONALD ELMER SMITH

b. 25 Jan., 1915, Mt. Carroll, Illinois

A. ALLEN LEE SMITH
b. 14 June, 1939, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 26 May, 1938, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
KAY MARLENE WINTER
b. 6 April, 1939, Galena, Illinois

1. ERIC LEE SMITH
b. 12 Oct., 1958, Freeport, Illinois

2. MARY ANNETTE SMITH
b. 23 April, 1963, Morrison, Illinois

B. DWIGHT EUGENE SMITH
b. 16 April, 1954, Savanna, Illinois
m. 13 July, 1973, Sterling, Illinois
SUSAN ELAINE METZ
b. 14 Oct., 1954, Sterling, Illinois

95
96

DESCENDANTS OF WILLIAM C. AND ANNA K. DAEHLER

I. GOLDA LOUISE DAEHLER
b. 30 Aug., 1895, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 7 Oct., 1920, St. Paul, Minnesota
BERTICE WEBSTER ALLEN
b. 5 Sept., 1894, Spring Valley, Minnesota

d. 18 Feb., 1975, Spring Valley, Minnesota

A, LEOTA ERMA ALLEN
b. 20 May, 1921, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. 16 Nov., 1939, Spring Valley, Minnesota

RODNEY JOHN FIMON
b. 30 March, 1920, Chatfield, Minnesota

1. RONALD JOHN FIMON
bi» 25 Aug., 1940, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. 26 June, 1960, Austin, Minnesota
JULY ARLENE ELAM
b. 29 Aug., 1940, Austin, Minnesota

a. MARTIN JOSEPH FIMON
b. 7 July, 1962, Austin, Minnesota

b. ROBERT LYNN FIMON
b. 5 Nov., 1963, Northfield, Minnesota

ec. DAVID SCOTT FIMON
b. 10 Oct., 1965, Iowa Falls, Iowa

d. RENEE MICHELLE FIMON
b. 25 Jan., 1968, Iowa Falls, Iowa

e. RICHARD DEAN FIMON
b. 8 Sept., 1971, Iowa Falls, Iowa

2. ALLEN JOSEPH FIMON.
b. 21 Aug., 1941, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. 10 Oct., 1968, Austin, Minnesota
NANCY KAY THORN
b. 26 June, 1944, Austin, Minnesota

a. MICHELLE RENEE FIMON
b. 13 July, 1969, Austin, Minnesota

b. MICHAEL ALLEN FIMON
b. 7 Aug., 1970, Austin, Minnesota

c. MARAYE BERNADETTE FIMON
b. 9 Nov., 1973, Austin, Minnesota
Il.

FLORENCE MAE DAEHLER

b.
d.
m.

27 Dec., 1896, Chadwick, Illinois
28 Dec., 1965, Waterloo, Iowa
24 Sept., 1916, Spring Valley, Minnesota

FREDERICK WILLIAM LEE

b.

A.

26 June, 1890, Spring Valley, Minnesota

EVELYN MARIE LEE

b. 1 Feb., 1917, Racine, Minnesota
m. 12 Nov., 1945

ODA LESTER CARSON

b. 26 Oct., 1901, Tama, Iowa

KENNTH FREDERICK LEE
b. 2 July, 1918, Spring Valley, Minnesota

d. 23 Jan., 1975, Des Moines, Iowa

m. 4 July, 1948, Waterloo, Iowa’. r DIV.
RUBY LAUREL ANDERSON f a .

b. 23 Oct., 1923, Ortonville, Minnesota

m. 12 Aug., 1972, Waterloo, Iowa

DARLENE TAYLOR

b.

MELVIN LAWRENCE LEE

b. 16 Jan., 1920, Spring Valley, Minnesota

m. 16 Aug., 1954, Austin, Minnesota

EVALYN MADGE SHUFELT
b. 12 March, 1919, Nashua, Iowa

1. DEBRA ANN LEE

b. 21 June, 1955, Waterloo, Iowa

m. 21 June, 1974, Fort Gordon, Georgia
WOODROW WILLIAM GARDNER

b. 10 March, 1956, Cincinnati, Ohio

DE LORES CATHRYN LEE

b. 10 Nov., 1921, Frankfort Township, Minnesota
m. 28 Aug., 1950, Anita, Iowa

MAX WILLIAM KARNS

b. 14 Aug., 1921, Anita, Iowa

MARVIN WILLIS LEE

b. 5 May, 1923, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. 21 Feb., 1943, Preson, Minnesota

SHIRLEY E. DRINKALL
b. 30 July, 1926, Spring Valley, Minnesota

1. JUANITA KAY LEE

b. 10 Sept., 1947, Preston, Minnesota
m. 1 June, 1968, Wterloo, Iowa ©
CLINTON JAMES MONTEITH

b. 22 Aug., 1944, La Porte City, Iowa

a. CORINNE KAY MONTEITH
b. 17 Dec., 1973, Waterloo, Iowa

OF

1972
98

2. DAVID GENE LEE

b. 18 Aug., 1949, Preson, Innesota
m. 10 Aug., 1974, Wyoming, Iowa
BRENDA SUE WALTERS

b. 5 Dec., 1949, Anamosa, Iowa

a. CHAD DAVID LEE
b. 19 Jan., 1975, Waterloo, Iowa

3. ELWIN DALE LEE
b. 4 Oct., 1955, Preston, Minnesota

4. JAMES JAY LEE
b. 24 Jan., 1957, Preson, Minnesota

5. CHARLES RAY LEE

b. 25 Dec., 1966, Waterloo, Iowa
SHIRLEY MAE LEE
b. 28 Dec., 1928, Grand Meadow, Minnesota
m. 20 Dec., 1947, Independence, Iowa

VERL KENNETH JOHNSON
b. 22 April, 1912, Winthrop, Iowa
d. 3 March, 1968, Waterloo, Iowa

1. VERL KENNETH JOHNSON JR.
b. 27 May. 1949, Inglewood, California
m. 1 June, 1970, Waterloo, Iowa
WANDA ROSE EILDERTS
b. 2 April, 1951, Waterloo, Iowa

a. DANIEL ROSS JOHNSON
b. 12 June, 1972, Long Beach, California
d. 13 June, 1972, Long Beach, California

MARLYS JEAN LEE

b. 13 Dec., 1930, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. 21 Feb., 1948, Waterloo, Iowa

ROBERT WILBUR LEHMAN

b. 22 Sept., 1926, Waterloo, Iowa

1. GREGORY WARD LEHMAN’

b. 31 Aug., 1948, Lorain, Ohio
2. RICKY JAE LEHMAN

b. 3 Oct., 1949, Waterloo, Iowa
3. STEVEN MARK LEHMAN

b. 18 Aug., 1950, Waterloo, Iowa

m. 11 Aug., 1973, Waterloo, Iowa

DEBORAH ANN WILDES
b. 8 Sept., 1951, Waterloo, Iowa

4. KEVIN RAY LEHMAN
b. 8 May, 1957, Waterloo, Iowa
99

H. JOYCE ELRAY LEE
b. 9 March, 1934, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. ll Feb., 1957, Dubuque, Iowa DIV. 1959
JERALD CLAYTON KNAPPLE
b. 8 Oct., 1933, Waldenburg, Arkansas

1. RANDALL CLAYTON KNAPPLE
b. 10 March, 1954, Iowa City, Iowa

2. ROBIN LEE KNAPPLE
b. 2 Sept., 1955, Waterloo, Iowa
m.
MICHAEL LYNN COX
b. 6 March, 1957, Fort Smith, Arkansas

3. RENEE LYNN KNAPPLE
b. 22 June, 1957, Waterloo, Iowa

I. LOIS JOAN LEE
b. 20 June, 1937, Spring Valley, Minnesota
d. 9 April, 1944, Rochester, Minnesota

= J. ROBERT EUGENE LEE
b. 19 March, 1941, Spring Valley, Minnesota
m. 31 Aug., 1964, Preston, Minnesota

_ JANET KAYE BEIER
b. 17 April, 1945, Waterloo, Iowa

1. CINDY KAYE LEE
b. 29 May, 1964,. Waterloo, Iowa

2. CATHY JO LEE
b. 25 April, 1967, Waterloo, Iowa

III. IRVIN WILLIAM DAEHLER
= b. 13 Feb., 1899, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 23 July, 1925, Waterloo, Iowa

IV. DELLA MINNIE DAEHLER
b. 7 May, 1900, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 23 July, 1925, Waterloo, Iowa
CHESTER FRANCIS
b. 6 March, 1899
m. 6 Aug., 1930
LEE EDWARD NESBIT
b. 20 Sept., 1900, Des Moines, Iowa

A. MERWIN FRANCIS
b. 17 Feb., 1921, St. Paul, Minnesota

B. KATHRYN HELEN FRANCIS
b. 21 Aug., 1922
m. 7 Aug., 1937
CHARLES E. ROBERTS
b. 13 March, 1910
1. JANICE KAY ROBERTS
b. 30 July, 1938

2. VICKI LYNN ROBERTS
b. 20 Jan., 1952

ELAINE DELLA FRANCIS

b. 3 Nov., 1923
m. 4 Oct., 1942
EDWARD E. GORDON
b. 11 Dec., 1916
1. TOBY ANN GORDON
b. 8 Jan., 1944, Oakland, Califoria
m.
CHARLES B. JONES
b.

a. JOHN CHARLES JONES
b. 13 Feb., 1964, Oakland, California

b. CARRIE ANN JONES
b. 13 Oct., 1968, Oakland, California

2. JOAN SUSAN GORDON
b. 11 July, 1947, Oakland, California
m.

PATRICK J. MC QUOWN

om

3. JULIE KAY GORDON
b. 4 May., 1953, Oakland, California

4. EDWARD DANIEL GORDON
b. 31 Oct., 1962, Oakland, California

LYLE NEIL FRANCIS
b. 27, Sept., 1925
d. 11 June, 1944, Saipan

DARLENE MAE FRANCIS
b. 4 Jan., 1927

V. RAYMOND CHARLES DAEHLER

b.
d.
m.

16 Aug., 1902, Chadwick, Illinois
21 Aug., 1936, Waterloo, Iowa
16 Jan., 1922, Chapin, Iowa

GAYLE VELMA SWITZER

Bs
d.

16 Dec., 1902, Chapin, Iowa
8 Oct., 1967, Waterloo, Iowa

100
VI.

VII.

101

A. BETTY JEAN DAEHLER
b. 24 Sept., 1924, Geneva, Iowa
m. 8 Oct., 1944, Waterloo, Iowa
JAMES MERLE ZASTROW
> bs.. 5,June, 1918, Mitchell, Iowa
“5, ~ me od ey : P. ca
1. SCOTT JAMES ZASTROW. .
b. 21 March, 1945, Waterloo, Iowa
m. 3 May, 1969, Des Moines, Iowa
LINDA BINGFORT
b. 8 Jan., 1948, Carroll, Iowa

a. KELLY LYNN ZASTROW
b. 4 Oct.,

b. JAMES SCOTT ZASTROW
b. 5 Jan., 1974,

2. RICHARD LYNN ZASTROW
b. 8 Oct., 1948,

3. KIM ALLYN ZASTROW
b. 9 Feb.,

MARION ALLEN DAEHLER

b. 26 July, 1906, Chadwick,
m. 1 May, 1947, Waterloo,
EVELYN BERNICE HANSON
b, 19 Dec., 1914, Waterloo,
ERMA DOROTHY DAEHLER
b. 22 Aug., 1907, Chadwick,
m. 24 Oct., 1923
HARRY G. WICKHAM
b. 22 July, 1903, Iowa Falls,
d. 13 June, 1945, Waterloo,
m. 22 April, 1972, Las Vegas,
HAROLD SLAUGHTER
b. 16 May, 1908, Winthrop,
A. KEITH WICKHAM

b. 15 May, 1925

m. 13 March, 1947

GWEN TIBBITS

b. 16 Nov., 1927

1. BRUCE ALAN WICKHAM
b. 20 Aug., 1949

2. CRAIG SCOTT WICKHAM
b. 16 Nov., 1951

3. DANIEL JOE WICKHAM
b. 17 April, 1959

1969, Des Moines,

Des Moines,

Waterloo,

1956, Waterloo,

Iowa

Iowa

Iowa

Iowa

Illinois

Iowa

Iowa

Illinois

Iowa
Iowa
Nevada

Iowa
102

B. DARRELL EUGENE WICKHAM
b. 2 May., 1926
m. 13 June, 1948, Waterloo, Iowa
ZONA MARIE HEIDT
b. 10 March, 1929,- Carthage, South Dakota

1. TONY J. WICKHAM
b. 31 Aug., 1955

2. TODD MARTIN WICKHAM
b. 28 Jan., 1959

C. DONNA M. WICKHAM
b. 2 July, 1929, Waterloo, Iowa
m. 23 Jan., 1949, Waterloo, Iowa
GEORGE E. WADDELL SR.
b. 10 April, -1930, Mason City, Iowa

1. GEORGE E. WADDELL JR.
b. 10 July, 1950, Waterloo, Towa

2. REBECCA A. WADDELL

b. 3 Nov., 1951, Waterloo, Iowa
3. DEBRA K. WADDELL

b. 23 May., 1953, Waterloo, Iowa

m. 2 Nov., 1973, Waterloo, Iowa

DANIEL W. VAUGHN

b. 3 Nov., 1951

D. BEVERLY ANN WICKHAM
b. 26 July, 1930

m. DIV.
JAMES RALPH MC NEIL

1. MICHAEL JAMES MC NEIL
b. 9 Nov., 1949

VIII. MERRILL CLAYTON DAEHLER
b. 27 Oct., 1914, Spring Valley, Minnesota
d. 13 April, 1937, Waterloo, Iowa
DESCENDANTS OF CHARLES J. AND ANNA MARIA QUCKBOERNER

I. LAURA QUECKBOERNER
b. 18 Feb., 1896, Chadwick, Carroll County, Illinois
m. 12 Feb., 1919, Lanark, Carroll County, Illinois
LOUIS FREEMAN RAUSER

103

b. 12 Dec., 1890, Mt. Carroll, Carroll County, Illinois

d. 8 July, 1967, Sterling, Whiteside County, Illino

A. DONALD CHARLES RAUSER
b. 20 Dec., 1919, Mt. Carroll, Carroll County, I1

is

linois

m. 19 Dec., 1945, Chadwick, Carroll County, Illinois

ELOISE REMMERS
b. 16 Nov., 1924, Morrison, Whiteside County, I11l

1. LARRY WAYNE RAUSER

b. 5 Dec., 1946, Morrison, Whiteside County,
m. 5 Aug. 1972, Rock Falls, Whiteside County
DIANE CARD

b. 8 May, 1951, Rock Falls, Whiteside County

a. DANIEL CHRISTIAN RAUSER
b. 19 Jan., 1975

2. KATHY LYNN RAUSER
b. 24 Oct., 1948, Morrison, Whiteside County,
m. 15 June, 1969, Morrison, Whiteside County,
GLEN VOGEL
b. 7 March, 1948, Columbia, Pennsylvania

3. KENT DALE RAUSER
b. 18 Aug., 1951, Morrison, Whiteside Country,

B. LYLE LEROY RAUSER
b. 14 May, 1951, Morrison, Whiteside County, I1l
m. 15 April, 1961, Rockford, Illinois
OPAL FAY ROBERTS
b. 29 June, 1936, Tupelo, Mississippi

1. RANDY LEE RAUSER
b. 19 Jan., 1964, Rockford, Illinois

to

LISA MARIE RAUSER
b. 17 Aug., 1969, Rockford, Illinois

II. ANNA QUECKBOERNER

b. 24 Oct., 1901

dad. 29 Aug., 1921

m., 12 April, 1921
EDWARD OLSON

inois
Illinois
, Lllinois

, Lllinois

Illinois
Illinois

Illinois

inois
DESCENDANTS OF CONRAD JOHN AND HAZEL DAEHLER

I. ENGAR DAEHLER

b. 31 May, 1911
m. 24 June, 1929
MAX DOSS
b. 17 March, 1889
d. 9 Oct., 1949
m. 18 May, 1952
CARL HOCKHAUSEN
bP Gets , ' £906
A. MAXINE GRACE DOSS
b. 19 March, 1930
m. 14 April, 1950
DONALD WILLIAM IMEL
b. 6 Sept., 1923
d. 14 Sept., 1964
m. 14 Feb., 1971
FRANCIS BARTZ
b. 30 March, 1922
1. PENNIE SUE IMEL
b. 18 Nov., 1952
‘m.  L Aug 1970
ANDREW WILLIAM HAMPTON
b. 19 Nov., 1951
a. MAX WILLIAM HAMPTON
b, 19 April,
2. LONNIE WILLIAM IMEL
b. 1 July, 1957
B. VENITA HAZEL DOSS

b. 20 Nov., 1935
m. 21 July, 1957
HUBERT ALLEN LUND
b. 15 July, 1932
d. 10 Dec., 1959
m. 29 Oct., 1965
GEORGE J. WELCH

b. 14 May, 1924

104
ils

HENRY ELMER DAEHLER

b.

5 Jan., 1915, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 24 Oct., 1936
CHRISTINE YAPPEN

b.

A.

24 May, 1918, Green Island, Iowa
LONNA JEAN DAEHLER

b. 21 Aug., 1940, Moline, Iowa

m. 23 Feb., 1957, Maquoketa, Iowa
GARY HERBERT SCHURBON

b. 26 Feb., 1937, Andrew, Iowa

1. CINDY LEA SCHURBON
b. 9 Aug., 1957, Maquoketa, Iowa

2. TAMMY KAY SCHURBON
b. 27 April, 1960, Maquoketa, Iowa

3. MARY JO SCHURBON
b. 2 Oct., 1962, Maquoketa, Iowa

4. SCOTT HENRY SCHURBON
b. 18 Oct., 1964, Maquoketa, Iowa

5. LINDSAY RAE SCHURBON
b. 12 Feb., 1975, Maquoketa, Iowa

BETTY ANN DAEHLER

b. 15 Sept., 1942, East Moline, Illinois
m. 26 June, 1960, Maquoketa, Iowa
DOUGLAS DWAIN MILLER

b. 15 Aug., 1937, Maquoketa, Iowa

1. KRISTY KAY MILLER
b. 7 Nov., 1961, Maquoketa, Iowa

2. KURTIS CHARLES MILLER
b. 29 June, 1972, Iowa City, Iowa

LARRY DEAN DAEHLER

b. 15 April, 1946, Savanna, Illinois
m. 30 June, 1963

CAROLE GEHRKE

b. 12 Sept., 1945, Dixon, Illinois

1. LARRY DAVID DAEHLER

b. 26 Dec., 1963, Sterling, Illinois

2. JULIE RENEE DAEHLER
b. 13 Aug., 1974, Sterling, Illinois

105
106

III. GLADYS DAEHLER
b. 8 Jan., 1917, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 29 July, 1934, Shannon, Illinois
VERLEN L. KUHLEMIER
b. 9 March, 1911, Carroll County, Illinois

A. GLEN RAY KUHLEMIER
b. 23 Dec., 1934, Pearl City, Illinois
m. 19 July, 1958, Freeport, Illinois
DELORES LOUISE LINNEMAN
b. 16 Aug., 1936, Freeport, Illinois

B. MARVIN GENE KUHLEMIER
b. 17 Nov., 1936, Milledgeville, Illinois

m. 3 Oct., 1959, Rock Falls, Illinois
BARBARA OTTENHAUSEN
b. 2 Feb., 1939, Freeport, Illinois

1. THERESA KUHLEMIER
b. 7 Sept., 1960, Sterling, Illinois

2. GENE KUHLEMIER
b. 3 Sept., 1965, Sterling, Illinois

C. EVAN DON KUHLEMIER
b. 3 Sept., 1965, Sterling, Illinois

m. 24 Oct., 1959, Rock Falls, Illinois
JERRIE SHANKEL
b. 14 Oct., 1937, Bloomington, Illinois
1. TERRIE LYNN KUHLEMIER
b. 18 Oct., 1960, Sterling, Illinois
d. 20 Oct., 1960, Sterling, Illinois

2. PATRICIA ANN KUHLEMIER
b. 13 Oct., 1962, Sterling, Illinois

3. KATHY JO KUHLEMIER
b. 26 Aug., 1967, Sterling, Illinois

4, KEVIN DON KUHLEMIER
b. 25 June, 1969, Sterling, Illinois

IV. WALTER G. DAEHLER
b. 24 Dec., 1919
m. - 1940 DIV. 1948
BERNETTA SHEPPARD
b. 25 June, 1921
d. 1968
m. 6 Aug., 1949
BETTY JANE TUTHILL
b. 9 Dec., 1922
RAMONA PAULINE DAEHLER
b. 29 June, 1941

m. 2 Oct., 1957
ALLEN A. KEMP

b. 26 Feb., 1939

m. 3 Dec., 1971

LYLE HOPKIN

b. 24 Sept., 1913

d. 11 Oct., 1973

1. LINDA ELIZABETH KEMP
b. 17 June, 1958

2. ALLEN ALBERT KEMP
b. 13 Dee., 1959

3. BENNY LEON KEMP
b. 24 Nov., 1960

4, FLOYD MICHAEL HOPKIN
b. 29 March, 1973

NORMA LORRAINE DAEHLER
b. 2 July, 1943

m. 15 Aug., 1964
DALE M. CASEY
b. 5 Aug., 1943

1. KIMBERLY DOREEN CASEY
b. 18 Feb., 1966

2. RHONDA MICHELE CASEY
b. 8 May, 1970

IOLA MAY DAEHLER
b. 20 July, 1944
m. 1 April, 1962
GEORGE HARSTON

b. 12 Feb., 1934

1. GEORGE ERWIN HARSTON
b. 21 Nov., 1963

2. RAYMOND LEE HARSTON
b. 20 May, 1965

3. MELVIN DEAN HARSTON
b. 20 April, 1967
d. 20 April, 1967

MADONNA MARIE DAEHLER
b. 13 Aug., 1947

m. 13 Feb., 1965

LEO HARRY ROBINSON

b. 26 Aug., 1931

DIV.

DIV.

107

1962

1971
LEON RAY ROBINSON
b. 2 Sept., 1965

KEVIN ALLEN ROBINSON

b. 30 Aug., 1967

TAMMY SUE ROBINSON
b. 4 March, 1970

MICHAEL EDWARD ROBINSON

b. 5 Oct., 1974

E. JOHN WALTER DAEHLER

Bis

26 April, 1950

F. THOMAS CLAUDE DAEHLER

b.
m.

16 March, 1956
14 Sept., 1974

DARCI GULLY

b.

20 Aug., 1955

V. LUELLA DAEHLER
b. 23 March, 1921

m.

7 April, 1937

CARL HENRY DAY

b. 5 Aug., 1913
A. RONALD CARL DAY
b. 28 July, 1938
m. 30 July, 1956
RUTH PITTS
b. 19 June, 1938
1. MARY LOU DAY
b. 14 May, 1957
2. CINDY DAY
b. 25 April, 1958
d. 23 April, 1967
3. RONALD CARL DAY JR.

B. L$ Feb., 1960

NORMAN GENE HOWARD DAY

b.

21 Feb., 1940

m. 21 Aug., 1959
LINDA BONNER

Bb:

i.

18 Jan., 1944

LORI DAY
b. 9 June, 1960

KELLY ELAINE DAY
b. 22 May, 1962

TODD DAVIS DAY
b. 16 Aug., 1966

108
VI.

C. PATRICIA HAZEL DAY

pb. 4 May, 1943
m.°°4 July, . 1958
MARK CUNNPNGHAM

b. 7 Sept., 1942

1. MARK LEE CUNNINGHAM
b. 7 July, 1959

2. BRYAN DOUGLAS CUNNINGHAM
b. 27 July, 1960

3. NICHOLAS CARL CUNNINGHAM
b. 27 Nov., 1963

4. PATRICK TODD CUNNINGHAM
b. 17 Aug., 1965

5. CHRISTOPHER SCOTT CUNNINGHAM

b. 8 May, 1968
HAZEL DAEHLER
b. 16 Nov., 1924, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 2 Oct., 1943
MARVIN WIGGERT
b. 22 Jan., 1924, Buffalo Lake, Minnesota
A. LLOYD WIGGERT
b. 19 Aug., 1944, Hutchinson, Minnesota
m. 29 May, 1965
ALICE JOYCE HULBURT
b. 27 April, 1944, Wheaton, Minnesota
1. WILLIAM WIGGERT
b. 26 Feb., 1966, Olivia, Minnesota
d. 26 Feb., 1966, Olivia, Minnesota
2. JUDD WIGGERT
b. 29 Sept., 1967, Glencoe, Minnesota
3. LUKE WIGGERT
b. 8 Oct., 1970, Glencoe, Minnesota
B. IVAN WIGGERT
b. 9 Feb., 1949, Glencoe, Minnesota
m. 31 Aug., 1974

MARGARET ANN KOZUBIK
b. 10 Jan., 1947, Willmar, New York

109
VII.

RALPH HAROLD DAEHLER

b.

m

A.

21 March, 1922

SYLVIA BELL WHIPPLE
b.

23 Oct., 1921

GLORIA DIANE DAEHLER

b. 16 Feb., 1940

m.

FRANCIS EDWARD RICHESON
b. 27 March, 1937

1. CHRISTINE LYNN RICHESON
b. 19 Nov., 1956

m.
STEVEN WILLIAM SCHWARTZ
b. 14 Oct., 1948

a. WILLIAM FRANCIS SCHWARTZ
b. 28 June, 1974

DORIS JUNE DAEHLER
b. 16 Feb., 1940

JAMES LEE DAEHLER
b. 2 May, 1944

m.

ROSEMARY ANN CONSTANTINO
b. 18 Aug., 1948

1. JAMES LEE DAEHLER JR.
b. 19 Aug., 1964

2. JAYSON DAMON DAEHLER
b. 18 Nov., 1970

DON LYNN DAEHLER
b. 29 March, 1948
m.

CARMEN KAY COOK
b. 29 Nov., 1949

1. TAMMY JO DAEHLER
b. 1 Oct., 1966

2. RENEE MARIE DAEHLER
' b. 27 July, 1971

110
111

DESCENDANTS OF CONRAD AND EMMA GEISZ

I. IRENE MARIE GEISZ
b. 2 July, 1906, Fair Haver’ Township, Illinois

m. 16 Jan., 1929, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
JENS ANDRESEN
b. 3 Dec., 1899, Clinton, Iowa

A. ARLISS ANDRESEN
b. 17 March, 1930, Savanna, Illinois

B. DARLENE ANDRESEN
b. 23 Jan., 1934, York Township, Illinois

m. 27 Aug., 1957, Chadwick, Illinois
ROGER LADD
b. 21 Aug., 1934, Farmington, Maine
1. JEFFREY LADD

b. 27 Nov., 1958, Farmington, Maine
2. MICHAEL JON LADD

b. 16 May, 1961, Farmington, Maine
3. BETH JANE LADD

b. 5 May, 1965, Farmington, Maine

C. HAROLD ANDRESEN

b. 10 Jan., 1937, York. Township, Illinois
m. 4 Aug., 1959, Platteville, Wisconsin

MARILYN KAY BELLMEYER
b. 13 April, 1937, Platteville, Wisconsin

1. RANDY RAY ANDRESEN
b. 15 March, 1961, Morrison, Illinois

2. RODNEY JAY ANDRESEN
b. 14 April, 1962, Morrison, Illinois

3, PAMELA KAY ANDRESEN
b. 26 March, 1967, Morrison, Illinois

4, ALAN LEE ANDRESEN
b. 1 April, 1971, Morrison, Illinois

D. DORIS ANN ANDRESEN
b. 12 Feb., 1940, York Township, Illinois
d. 14 Oct., 1968, Chadwick, Illinois

Fe.
II. REUBEN GEISZ
b. 30 May, 1910, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
m. 22 Jan., 1935, Dixon, Illinois
DOROTHY VOLZ
b. 23 July, 1916, Fair Haven Township, Illinois

A. KENNETH GEISZ
b. 8 March, 1938, Dixon, Illinois
m. 12 Jan., 1958, Lanark, Illinois
DORIS EDWARDS
b. 28 May, 1935, Lanark, Illinois

1. DEBORAH GEISZ
b. 8 Aug., 1958, Freeport, Illinois

2. KENNETH IRVIN GEISZ
b. 9 June, 1960, Freeport, Illinois

3. KIMBERLY ANN GEISZ
b. 10 July, 1965, Freeport, Illinois

B. GLORIA MAY GEISZ
b. 13 May, 1942, Freeport, Illinois
m. 10 Nov., 1963, Chadwick, Illinois
NORMAN STEWART
b. 1 July, 1941, Chadwick, Illinois

1. ELLEN RAE STEWART
b. 12 March, 1967, Freeport, Illinois

2. NEIL NORMAN STEWART
b. 23 March, 1971, Freeport, Illinois

C. RICHARD LEE GEISZ

b. 8 April, 1945, Freeport, Illinois
m. 1 March, 1969, Chadwick, Illinois
SUSAN WEIRSAMA

b. 9 Sept., 1949, Lanark, Illinois

1. STEPHEN LOUIS GEISZ
b. 30 Nov., 1971, Freeport, Illinois

2. ROBIN GEISZ
b. 6 Feb., 1974, Freeport, Illinois

III. CLARENCE JOHN GEISZ
b. 24 March, 1916, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 20 Feb., 1917, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
113

DESCENDANTS OF LOUIS C. AND ANNA E. DAEHLER

I. FERDINAND DAEHLER
b. 25 April, 1873, Chadwick, Illinois
— a oe: 3 March, 1938, Boone, Iowa
iene TM, 23’ July, 1924, Newton, Iowa _*
EFFIE LYDIA MAYTAG
b. 23 Feb., 1890, Laurel, Iowa

A. JOHN CARL DAEHLER
b. 14 Nov., 1935, Cook County, Illinois

B. DAVID EDWIN DAEHLER
b. 7 Oct., 1937, Cook County, Illinois
m. 8 June, 1957, Newton, Iowa
NANCY ANN BRECKENRIDGE
b. 7 March, 1939, Iowa City, Iowa

1. DIANNE LYNN DAEHLER
b. 27 April, 1939, Iowa City, lowa

2. DAVID WILLIAM DAEHLER
b. 30 June, 1961, Newton, Iowa

II. MARIA ELIZABETH DAEHLER
b. 13 Nov., 1874, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 26 Feb., 1947, Sterling, Illinois
m. 2 Sept., 1914, Chadwick, Illinois
HENRY R. PARSONS
b. 16 Nov., 1858, New York
d. 18 April, 1942, Sterling, Illinois

III. CARL DAEHLER
b. 21 March, 1876, Chadwick, Illinois

d. 16 Jan., 1941
m. 19 Feb., 1902
DORA A. K. SCHREINER
b. 20 Jan., 1881
d. 11 May, 1967

A. LOUISA MARIE DAEHLER
b. ll Feb., 1905
m. 12 June, 1937
FAY HARRY REITZEL
b. 25 Jan.;, 1915

1. DAEHLE R. REITZEL
b. 20 April, 1941
m. 26 Sept., 1960
LOIS ANN STONE
M. 26 Sept., 1966
SHERRY REIN
a. DONNA RAE REITZEL
b. 12 April, 1961

b. DARYL RICHARD REITZEE
- b. :3QMay, ~ 1962

c. RHONDA KAE REITZEL
b. 16 Sept., 1966

d. TRISHA MARIE REITZEL
b. 25 June, 1967

e. TERI JEAN REITZEL

b. 9 Oct., 1968
PAUL WILLIAM FERDINAND DAEHLER
b. 9 Jan., 1907, Fair Haven Township, Illinois
d. 28 Dec., 1972, Mount Carroll, Illinois
m. 6 Feb., 1941, Mount Carroll, Illinois
LEONA ALBERTINE SCHMIDT
b. ll May, 1912, Freedom Township, Illinois

1. DARLENE LEONA DAEHLER
b. 8 July, 1943, Freeport, Illinois
m. 19 Dec., 1964, Mount Carroll, Illinois
WILLIAM BERNARDIN
b. 21 March, 1943, Rock Falls, Illinois

a. MARK ANDREW BERNARDIN
b. 11 Oct., 1968, Freeport, Illinois

2. DWAYNE PAUL DAEHLER
b. 8 July, 1943, Freeport, Illinois
m. 24 June, 1967, Estherville, Iowa
MARCIA NELSON
b. 28 Oct., 1945, Estherville, Iowa

3. MELVA JEAN DAEHLER
b. 21 March, 1955, Freeport, Illinois

LOUIS ALBERT DAEHLER

b. 7 Sept., 1909, Chadwick, Illinois

d. 21 May, 1975, Porterville, California
m. 10 June, 1937, Chadwick, Illinois
DOROTHY MAE WEAST

b. 18 Dec., 1908, Polo, Illinois

1. MARILYN SUE DAEHLER
b. 2 Oct., 1938, Freeport, Illinois
m. 18 June, 1960, San Jose, California

STANLEY GADWAY
b. 10 Nov., 1936, North Platte, Nebraska

114
115

a. STANLEY DEAN GADWAY

b. 1 April, 1965, San Jose, California
b. SCOTT DAVID GADWAY

b. 30 Aug., * 1968, San Jose, California

2. CAROL JEAN DAEHLER
b. 6Jan., 1942, Freeport, Illinois
m. 9 Dec., 1969, Berne, Switzerland
CLAUDE JEROME ELLISON
b. 23 July, 1930, Springfield, Missouri

a. CLAUDIA BETH ELLISON
b. 10 July, 1970, Nuremburg, Germany

b. AMY REBECCA ELLISON
b. 7 May, 1973, Netherlands

3. ELAINE MAE DAEHLER
b. 15 Feb., 1944, Freeport, Illinois
m. 12 Sept., 1964, Glendale, California
ROBERT GERALD BEGLEY
b. 30 April, 1941, Marshall, Arkansas

a. ALLEN KEITH BEGLEY
b. 29 Oct., 1967, Portersville, California

b. DONNA LYNN BEGLEY
b. 16 June, 1970, Portersville, California

ARTHUR FREDERICK DAEHLER
b. 24 Nov., 1911
d. 26 Aug., 1913

HAROLD HENRY DAEHLER
b. 23 Oct., 1918
d. 11 Feb., 1966
m. 21 June, 1941
VIVA DARLENE EVERSOLL
b. 14 Jan., 1922

1. MARY ANN DAEHLER

b. 22 Aug., 1942
m. 27 Oct., 1962
LESTER J. ELDER

b. 8 Oct., 1938

a. JANE ELIZABETH ELDER
b. 22 Aug., 1964

pb. JOHN LESTER ELDER
b. 12 Nov., 1965
2. DAVID LEE DAEHLER
b. 27 May, 1948
m. 22 Jan., 1972
NADINE RAE EHRICH
b. 23 Feb., 1950

a. DONNAE ELIZABETH DAEHLER

b. 13 Oct., 1974

3. DIANA LYNN DAEHLER
b. 27 May, 1948
m. 26 April, 1968
WALTER EDISON HOLLAND

116

b. 5 Oct., 1946

a. JOSHUA HAROLD HOLLAND

B. 18 March,

IV. GEORGE DAEHLER

1946

b. 26 Jan., 1878, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 25 April, 1945, Chadwick, Illinois

m,
PEARL KIER

b. 30 Dec., 1889, Banner City, Kansas
ad. 7 April, 1968, Charlotte, Iowa

A. ALBERT DAEFHLER

b. 16 July, 1929,
m. 5 July, 1969,
PHYLLIS (ZIEGLER)
b. 14 March, 1927,
d. 20 May, 1970,
m. 30 Nov., 1973,
COLLETTE SHAW

b. 4 Feb. , 1921,

V. WILHELMINA DAEHLER

Sterling, Illinois
Sterling, Illinois
FRIIS

Clinton, Iowa
Clinton, Iowa

Honolulu, Hawaii

Clinton, Iowa

b. 14 Sept., 1880, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 28 March, 1943, Chadwick, Illinois
mM. 29 Jan., 1902, Chadwick, Illinois

WILLIAM F. FINK

b. 6 Aug. , 1875, Chadwick, Illinois
29 Oct., 1954, Chadwick, Illinois

d
A. Stillborn son
B

ELMER CARL FINK
b. 18 Aug., 1904,
d. 8 June, 1948,
m. 19 Dec., 1925,
CORA FAE APPEL
b. 21 March, 1904,

Chadwick, Illinois
Chadwick, Illinois
Chadwick, Illinois

Thomson , Illinois
Li 7

1. ARNOLD FAE FINK
b. 16 March, 1927, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 13 Oct., 1946, Chadwick, Illinois
JUNE KATHRYN MILLER
b. 2 June, 1928, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 2 Dec., 1957, Lanark, Illinois
m. 26 June, 1959, Milledgeville, Illinois
FAITH MARIE COLEMAN
b. 16 April, 1930, Milledgeville, Illinois

a. JUDY ANN FINK
b. 2 June, 1947, Sterling, Illinois
m. 20 March, 1968, Lanark, Illinois
_ DONALD L. DAMPMAN
b. 7 March, 1946, Milledgeville, Illinois

1. RANDY LEE DAMPMAN
b. 8 June, 1970, Sterling, Illinois

2. DARRELL JASON DAMPMAN
b. 9 Oct., 1973, Sterling, Illinois

b. GERALD FAE FINK

b. 2 Oct., 1948, Sterling, Illinois

m. 22 Feb., 1968, Milledgeville, Illinois
PENNY WARNER

b. 10 Feb., 1950, Freeport, Illinois

1. MICHAEL JOHN FINK
b. 16 Sept., 1968, Sterling, Illinois

2. RODNEY MARSHALL FINK

b. 12 May, 1972, Sterling, Illinois
c. TED ARTHUR FINK
b. 28 Jan., 1954, Sterling, Illinois
m. 28 Dec., 1974
RHODA LEE DUMBROES
b.

d. DALE ROSS FINK
b. 4 July, 1960, Sterling, Tllinois

2. VERNON ARTHUR FINK
b. 5 Jan., 1931, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 6 Jan., 1963, Sterling, Illinois
CAROLLYN ELAINE SERGEANT
b. 3 July, 1937, Peoria, Illinois

a. THOMAS ARTHUR FINK
b. 14 March, 1967, Sterling, Illinois
VI.

Vil.

HAROLD JOHN FINK
b. 8 Nov., 1908, Chadwick, Illinois

LAURA ANNA FINK

b. 28 Aug., 1916, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 20 June, 1942, Chadwick, Illinois
HERBERT RICHARD PATTON

b. 23 July, 1916, Villa Grove, Illinois
d. 9 May, 1971, Stockton, California

1. JUDITH ANN PATTON
b. 29 April, 1945, Menlo Park, California
m. ll April, 1965, Sacramento, California
GARY KAGEL
b. 25 July, 1943, Sacramento, California

a. CARL RICHARD KAGEL
b. 24 May, 1972, Sacramento, California

b. MICHELLE ANN KAGEL
B. 12 Nov., 1973, Sacramento, California

ALBERT HARTMAN DAEHLER

b.
d.

m

30 Jan., 1883, Chadwick, Illinois
27 July, 1947, Colorado Springs, Colorado

MABLE C. LOWRY
Bb.
de
m.

7 March, 1884
19 Jan., 1923, Colorado Springs, Colorado
2 Sept., 1925, Colorado Springs, Colorado

MARJORIE BARRON

ior
A.

15 July, 1902, Kirwin, Kansas

ELISA DAEHLER
b. 22 Dec., 1927, Colorado Springs, Colorado
d. 23 Dec., 1960, Colorado Springs, Colorado

MARY DAEHLER
b. 19 Sept., 1930, Colorado Springs, Colorado

m. 3 Oct., 1958, Castle Rock, Colorado
JOHN HENRY SMITH
b. 23 Feb., 1926, Malvery, Pennsylvania

d. 28 July, 1969, Lincoln, Nebraska

OSCAR DAEHLER

b.
d.
m.

9 Nov., 1884, Chadwick, Illinois
13 Aug., 1959, Freeport, Illinois
25 June, 1912, Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan

DORA STUART

b.
d.

3 Dec., 1884, Savanna, Illinois
2 May, 1944, Chadwick, Illinois

118
VIII.

IX.

FRED DAEHLER

b. 24 Sept., 1887, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 6 Jan., 1967, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 25 March, 1917, Vandalia, Michigan
GRACE RATLIFF

b. 24 Nov., 1887, Fairmont, Indiana
d. 13 March, 1946, Freeport, Illinois

HERMAN WALTER DAEHLER
b. 21 March, 1891, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 16 March, 1962, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 3 Jan., 1915, Chadwick, Illinois
LOUISA STRAUCH
b. 31 May, 1889, Chadwick, Illinois

A. ELLWOOD WILLIAM DAEHLER
b. 11 April, 1916, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 9 Dec., 1967, Thomson, Illinois
BESSIE RUTH GROHARING
b. 8 July, 1912, Thomson, Illinois

B. ARLOWE KENNETH DAEHLER
b. 24 Sept., 1918, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 11 June, 1950, Hartford, Wisconsin
HAZEL DELORES LEPIEN
b. 13 Oct., 1925, Hartford, Wisconsin

1. JOHN PAUL DAEHLER
b. 11 Sept., 1954, Chicago, Illinois

2. SARA LOUISA DAEHLER

b. 28 Sept., 1955, Sterling, Illinois

3. RUTH MARIE DAEHLER

b. 15 Jan., 1958, Sterling, Illinois

C. LYLE EUGENE DAEHLER
b. 10 Dec., 1920, Chadwick, Illinois
d. 3 March, 1931, Freeport, Illinois

D. LEON CLAIRE DAEHLER
b. 1 Feb., 1924, Chadwick, Illinois

m. 30 Aug., 1953, Mount Carroll, Illinois

MARILYN RUTH ERDMIER
b. 3 Aug., 1932, Freeport, Illinois

119
1. JEFFREY LLOYD DAEHLER

b. 6 Dec., 1954, Sterling,
2. CONNIE SUE DAEHLER
b. 28 Feb., 1959, Sterling, Illinois

3. WILLIAM LEE DAEHLER

b. 5 March, 1964, Morrison, Illinois

E. EILEENE LOUISA DAEHLER

b. 4 April, 1925, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 30 June, 1951, Washington, D. C.

WILLIAM NICHOLS BUTLER

b. 17 Jan., 1927, Champaign, Illinois

1. JOSELYN GAIL BUTER

b. 6 Oct., 1954, Alexandria, Virgina

2. SHAUNA LANI BUTLER

b. 8 Feb., 1956, Honolulu, Hawaii

3. MARK JEREMY BUTLER

b. 22 Aug., 1959, Honolulu, Hawaii

F. DONOVAN CARL DAEHLER

b. 28 March, 1928, Chadwick, Illinois
m. 18 June, 1956, Sterling, Illinois

JOYCE CATHERINE YELL.

b. 27 Aug., 1934, Sterling, Illinois

1. JO ANN LOUISA DAEHLER

b. 16 April, 1957, Freeport, Illinois

2. KATHLEEN MARIE DAEHLER

b. 30 Sept., 1958, Freeport, Illinois

3. JAMES DONOVAN DAEHLER

b. 16 Sept., 1959, Freeport, Illinois

4. CHARLES HERMAN DAEHLER

b. 27 Feb., 1964, Freeport, Illinois

X. LOUISA LOUELLA DAEHLER
b. 26 April, 1893, Chadwick,

d. 6 Dec., 1931, Chadwick,
m. 8 Dec., 1915, Chadwick,
CARL HAAG

b. 28 March, 1893

d. 4 Aug., 1966

A. ORVILLE GEORGE HAAG
b. 6 Feb., 1923
d. 26 Nov., 1962
m. 26 July, 1957
DORIS MEYER

Illinois
Illinois
Illinois

Illinois

120
121

SOURCES OF INFORMATION

JOHANN KONRAD DAEHLER AND HIS FAMILY

Item l

His death notice is copied from a contemporary
newspaper account. The clipping found in a scrap book
of family remembrances contains no identification as to
its source. :

Item 2

German data came from the manuscript autobiog-
raphy of Johann Konrad Daehler and from Freienseen par-
ish records contained in the files of the Hessian State
Archives at Darmstadt, Germany.

Marriage and burial records consulted in this
country were those contained in the registers GLUSts
Paul's German Lutheran Church, commonly known as the
Black Oak Church. It was located in Fair Haven Township
west of the village of Chadwick. Johann Konrad Daehler
helped to organize the church in 1860, and served as its
first duly elected secretary. The church ceased to func-
tion as a church in 1950; and the church registers are
now part of the archives of the First Lutheran Church of
Chadwick.

Tombstone inscriptions have given valuable
clues. The older members of the Daehler family were
originally buried in the Daehler family cemetery that
was located on the homestead west of Chadwick. All of
the stones were removed and have been carefully reset
and preserved. At the same time, ca. 1910 or 1911, the
remains of those members of the family buried in the
private burial ground were exhumed and reinterred in the
Chadwick Cemetery. The family headstone contains the
following inscription in German:

"Burial place for the family of the legally
wedded couple, KONRAD AND KATHARINA DAEHLER, 1855 immi-
grants from Freienseen, Grand Duchy of Hesse, Germany."

Data about Otto and Wilhelmina (Daehler) Immelt
was obtained from the probate files (numbers 2380 and
2797) of the Black Hawk County, Iowa, District Court at
Waterloo. THE HISTORY OF BLACK HAWK COUNTY, IOWA, pub-
lished in Chicago by the Western Historial Company in
1878, contains on page 539 a short biographical sketch
of Otto Immelt, who at that time was farming in Benning-
ton Township near Waterloo. The couple had resided
there since 1867.
Items 3 and 4

‘1. Records of Jo Ann (Shimonek) Schiefelbein of Wichita,
Kansas, who collected all data relating to the descen-
dants of Charles and Dorothea (Daehler) Smith.

2. Baptismal, confirmation, and burial records of St.
_Paul's German Lutheran Church, Chadwick, Illinois.
Marriage records of Carroll County, Illinois, on
file in office of the county clerk at Mt. Carrol.
Burial records, Rosehill Cemetery, Chicago, Illinois.

3. Family Bible records of Katharina (Daehler) Straub.
THE HOLY BIBLE, published in Philadelphia by the A.J.
Holman Company in 1882, is now in the possession of
Mrs. Louis P. Roth (Myrene Clarke) of Princeton, Ill.

4. Death certificates on file with the Bureau of Vital
Statistics, Elgin, .Illinois.
Marriage records of Carroll County, Illinois.

5. Family records, Mrs. John G. Doden (Laura Daehler )
of Chadwick, Illinois.

6. Family records, Mrs. B. W. Allen (Golda Daehler) of
Spring Valley, Minnesota.

7. Records of St. Paul's German Lutheran Church, Chadwick,
Illinois.

8. Family records, Henry E. Daehler of Maquoketa, Iowa,
and Mrs. Verlen L. Kuhlemier (Gladys Daehler) of Rock
Falls, Illinois.

9. Records of St. Paul's German Lutheran Church, Chadwick,
Illinois.

10. Family records, Mrs. Jens Andresen (Irene Geisz) of
Chadwick, Illinois.

Items 5 through 14.

Data about the various families came in the main
from information collected by the members of each respec-
tive family. There are some exceptions. These relate to
those children of Louis C. and Anna E. Daehler who left no
descendants. In these instances it was necessary to obtain
data from church records, death certificates, death notices
in local newspapers, and reports given to the secretaries of
the Daehler family reunions, which have been held annually
Since 1934.
